ENTY:cremat What films featured the character Popeye Doyle ? (films)
ENTY:animal What fowl grabs the spotlight after the Chinese Year of the Monkey ? (What)
ABBR:exp What is the full form of .com ? (form)
HUM:ind What contemptible scoundrel stole the cork from my lunch ? (scoundrel)
HUM:gr What team did baseball 's St. Louis Browns become ? (Browns)
HUM:title What is the oldest profession ? (profession)
DESC:def What are liver enzymes ? (enzymes)
ENTY:event What is considered the costliest disaster the insurance industry has ever faced ? (industry)
LOC:state What sprawling U.S. state boasts the most airports ? (state)
DESC:desc What did the only repealed amendment to the U.S. Constitution deal with ? (null)
DESC:def What is '' Nine Inch Nails '' ? (What)
DESC:def What is an annotated bibliography ? (bibliography)
NUM:date What is the date of Boxing Day ? (date)
ENTY:other What articles of clothing are tokens in Monopoly ? (tokens)
DESC:desc What 's the Olympic motto ? (motto)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the name ' Scarlett ' ? (origin)
ENTY:letter What 's the second-most-used vowel in English ? (vowel)
LOC:other What is the highest waterfall in the United States ? (waterfall)
ABBR:exp What does the abbreviation AIDS stand for ? (null)
ENTY:other What does a spermologer collect ? (spermologer)
DESC:desc What do Mormons believe ? (Mormons)
ENTY:animal What relative of the racoon is sometimes known as the cat-bear ? (null)
ENTY:other What was cash-conscious Colonel Edwin L. Drake the first to drill ? (Drake)
HUM:ind What 1920s cowboy star rode Tony the Wonder Horse ? (star)
ENTY:food What cocktail inspired John Doxat to write the book Stirred-Not Shaken ? (cocktail)
HUM:gr What ISPs exist in the Caribbean ? (ISPs)
ENTY:other What weapon is the mythological character Apollo most proficient with ? (character)
LOC:country What country do the Galapagos Islands belong to ? (Islands)
DESC:def What is ethology ? (ethology)
DESC:def What is the nature of learning ? (nature)
ENTY:color What 's the only color Johnny Cash wears on stage ? (Cash)
ENTY:termeq What 's the term for a young fox ? (term)
LOC:state What U.S. state lived under six flags ? (state)
DESC:def What is the Kashmir issue ? (issue)
DESC:def What does '' extended definition '' mean and how would one write a paper on it ? (definition)
LOC:country What country 's capital is Tirana ? (Tirana)
DESC:def What is titanium ? (titanium)
DESC:def What is a caldera ? (caldera)
LOC:other What are the names of the tourist attractions in Reims ? (names)
DESC:reason What are Cushman and Wakefield known for ? (Cushman)
LOC:other What body of water does the Danube River flow into ? (River)
ENTY:other What does the six-footed Musca domestica become when it enters a house ? (domestica)
DESC:desc What is the history of skateboarding ? (history)
HUM:ind What 19th-century painter died in the Marquesas Islands ? (painter)
LOC:country What country did the Nazis occupy for 1 , CD NNS IN NNP NNP NNP . (Nazis)
ENTY:other What is Nebraska 's most valuable resource ? (resource)
DESC:desc What is the origin of head lice ? (origin)
LOC:state What is the nickname for the state of Mississippi ? (nickname)
ENTY:animal What was the first domesticated bird ? (bird)
LOC:country What country did King Wenceslas rule ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of shadows ? (fear)
DESC:reason What causes the body to shiver in cold temperatures ? (body)
DESC:def What are bear and bull markets ? (markets)
ENTY:cremat What J.R.R. Tolkien book features Bilbo Baggins as the central character ? (book)
DESC:def What is '' dew point '' ? (point)
DESC:def What is the meaning of Jesus ? (meaning)
HUM:gr What company 's logo is a '' W '' in a circle ? (W)
DESC:def What is the definition of a cascade ? (definition)
LOC:country What country 's national passenger rail system is called Via ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word '' attic '' ? (origin)
DESC:desc What did Delilah do to Samson 's hair ? (Delilah)
ENTY:animal What kind of animals were in the Paleozoic era ? (kind)
LOC:state What U.S. state is Fort Knox in ? (Knox)
ENTY:animal What is a female rabbit called ? (rabbit)
LOC:other What are the world 's four oceans ? (oceans)
ENTY:cremat What 's the only work by Michelangelo that bears his signature ? (work)
ENTY:animal What is the largest snake in the world ? (snake)
ENTY:termeq What 's the common name for acetylsalicylic acid ? (name)
DESC:def What does the Georgetown '' Hoya '' mean ? (Georgetown)
DESC:desc What is the historical relationship of Catholic Church and bingo ? (relationship)
HUM:ind What crooner joined The Andrews Sisters for Pistol Packin Mama ? (crooner)
HUM:gr What piano company claims its product is the '' Instrument of the immortals '' ? (Instrument)
ENTY:cremat What novel inspired the movie BladeRunner ? (novel)
DESC:def What is a transistor ? (transistor)
ENTY:cremat What is a film starring Jude Law ? (film)
ENTY:animal What Hollywood dog died in the arms of Jean Harlow in 1932 ? (dog)
ENTY:substance What are the most common elements in the Earth 's crust ? (elements)
HUM:ind What actress has received the most Oscar nominations ? (actress)
DESC:def What are equity securities ? (securities)
DESC:def What is gymnophobia ? (What)
ENTY:animal What was the name of the '' Little Rascals '' dog ? (name)
LOC:city What city boasts Penn 's Landing , on the banks of the Delaware river ? (city)
ENTY:cremat What Broadway musical was inspired by Cervantes 's Don Quixote ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word , JJ . (origin)
ABBR:exp What does INRI stand for when used on Jesus ' cross ? (INRI)
HUM:ind What athlete makes the most money from sports merchandise sales ? (athlete)
ENTY:body What part of your body contains the corpus callosum ? (part)
LOC:country What two South American countries do n't border Brazil ? (countries)
ENTY:cremat What album put The Beatles on the cover of Time in 1967 ? (album)
ENTY:cremat What poem contains the line , '' grow old with me the best is yet to be '' . (poem)
DESC:def What is a dental root canal ? (canal)
ENTY:event What war did the Wanna-Go-Home Riots occur after ? (Riots)
NUM:date What is the busiest air travel season ? (season)
ENTY:body What 's the colored part of the eye called ? (part)
DESC:def What are hook worms ? (worms)
LOC:other What sun-blasted , 14-mile wide valley is just north of the Mojave desert ? (valley)
HUM:gr What Indian tribe is F Troop perpetually doing battle with ? (Troop)
LOC:city What is the name of the city that Maurizio Pellegrin lives in ? (Pellegrin)
ENTY:sport What game 's board shows the territories of Irkutsk , Yakutsk and Kamchatka ? (board)
HUM:ind What is the name of the managing director of Apricot Computer ? (name)
HUM:title What is the occupation of Nicholas Cage ? (occupation)
DESC:def What is the 401 , K , plan ? (What)
DESC:reason What causes pneumonia ? (What)
NUM:date What are the three winter months in the southern hemisphere ? (months)
DESC:def What does gringo mean ? (gringo)
LOC:country What country contains Africa 's northernmost point ? (country)
ENTY:dismed What therapy attempts to elicit the '' primal scream '' ? (therapy)
LOC:city What city is sometimes called Gotham ? (null)
ENTY:body What dangles over the tongue from the palate ? (What)
HUM:ind What dummy received an honorary degree from Northwestern University ? (What)
LOC:country What countries have the largest areas of forest ? (countries)
DESC:def What is Eagle 's syndrome styloid process ? (process)
HUM:ind What actor said in A Day at the Races : '' Either he 's dead or my watch has stopped '' ? (watch)
HUM:ind What explorer was nicknamed Iberia 's Pilot ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What is a ball that hits the foul pole called ? (ball)
DESC:reason What makes hamburgers taste like steakburgers ? (hamburgers)
ENTY:event What are the rites accompanying the circumcision of a newly born-child in Judaism called ? (rites)
ENTY:other What was the education system in the 1960 's ? (system)
LOC:city What South American city has the world 's highest commercial landing field ? (city)
DESC:reason What is Betsy Ross famous for ? (Ross)
DESC:def What is '' snoogans '' ? (What)
ENTY:plant What shrubs can be planted that will be safe from deer ? (null)
HUM:gr What organization 's offices were broken into at Watergate in 1972 ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the design of the ship Titanic ? (design)
ABBR:exp What does S.O.S. stand for ? (S.O.S.)
DESC:desc What is the daily requirement of folic acid for an expectant mother ? (requirement)
DESC:def What is the '' 7-minute cigarette '' ? (cigarette)
ENTY:other What four forms does gold occur in ? (gold)
NUM:volsize What is the acreage of the Chappellet vineyard ? (acreage)
LOC:country What two European countries entered the War of American Independence against the British ? (countries)
DESC:def What is the filmmakers collabrative ? (filmmakers)
HUM:ind What Russian composer 's Prelude in C Sharp Minor brought him fame and fortune ? (Prelude)
DESC:reason What caused Harry Houdini 's death ? (What)
LOC:mount What is the name of the tallest mountain in the world ? (name)
ENTY:techmeth What 's the slowest Olympic swimming stroke ? (stroke)
HUM:ind What was the name of the first Russian astronaut to do a spacewalk ? (name)
ENTY:dismed What disease is transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito ? (null)
ENTY:food What rum is so '' mixable '' it is a one-brand bar ? (bar)
DESC:def What is the contents of proposition 98 ? (contents)
DESC:def What is paracetamol ? (What)
DESC:desc What are the powers and weaknesses of Green Lantern 's ring ? (powers)
HUM:ind What diminutive American female gymnast stole the show at the 1984 Olympics ? (gymnast)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the name Katie ? (origin)
HUM:gr What schools in the Washington , DC NN NN VBP NN NN NN NN . (null)
ENTY:instru What instrument is Ray Charles best known for playing ? (Charles)
DESC:def What 's the meaning of the Latin battle cry : Ad arma , ad arma . (arma)
ENTY:other What is the mascot for Notre Dame University ? (mascot)
LOC:other What Las Vegas hotel burned in November , 1980 , with the loss of 84 lives ? (hotel)
DESC:def What is a Canada two-penny black ? (What)
LOC:city What European city do Nicois live in ? (Nicois)
DESC:def What is the classic definition of tragic hero ? (definition)
ENTY:techmeth What are other ways of getting stretch marks besides pregnancy , weight loss , and weight lifting ? (ways)
ENTY:food What did brontosauruses eat ? (brontosauruses)
ENTY:color What color bottles do good Rhine wines come in ? (wines)
DESC:def What is molybdenum ? (molybdenum)
ENTY:other What is the lowest level of the American judiciary ? (level)
ENTY:animal What 's the official animal of Canada ? (animal)
NUM:volsize What is the size of the largest akita ? (size)
ENTY:animal What animal has the biggest eyes ? (animal)
LOC:city What is California 's capital ? (capital)
LOC:country What European country is home to the beer-producing city of Budweis ? (home)
DESC:desc What is the history of Valentine 's Day cards ? (history)
ENTY:termeq What do Italians call Florence ? (Italians)
ABBR:exp What does ' PSI ' stand for ? (PSI)
LOC:other What sea did the Romans call mare nostrum ? (Romans)
ENTY:termeq What 's the term for a bet before cards are dealt ? (term)
LOC:city What city did the Flintstones live in ? (Flintstones)
ENTY:termeq What is Latin for incompetent ? (What)
ENTY:dismed What chemicals are used in lethal injection ? (null)
HUM:gr What toy company is the world 's No.1 maker of female apparel ? (maker)
ENTY:sport What board game does a '' wood-pusher '' play poorly ? (game)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviation for micro ? (abbreviation)
ENTY:other What are the 7 articles of the constitution ? (articles)
ABBR:exp What does NASDAQ stand for ? (NASDAQ)
ABBR:exp What is BPH ? (BPH)
ENTY:other What is the fastest commercial automobile that can be bought in the US ? (automobile)
LOC:other What stadium do the Miami Dolphins play their home games in ? (Dolphins)
NUM:other What was Einstein 's IQ ? (IQ)
NUM:date What day was Pearl Harbor attacked in 1942 ? (Harbor)
HUM:ind What girl 's name is '' Teddy '' an affectionate form of ? (Teddy)
LOC:state What state is John F. Kennedy buried in ? (Kennedy)
ENTY:techmeth What is the best way to remove wallpaper ? (way)
LOC:state What U.S. state has an element named for it ? (state)
HUM:gr What company tabulates the ballots in voting for the Academy Awards ? (company)
LOC:other What is the deepest area of the Arctic Ocean ? (area)
ENTY:color What are Halloween 's colors ? (colors)
NUM:other What is the latitude and longitude of El Paso , Texas ? (latitude)
NUM:other What is the normal resting heart rate of a healthy adult ? (rate)
NUM:other What is the population of Ohio ? (population)
ENTY:animal What creature scares people in the film '' Jaws '' ? (creature)
HUM:ind What part did John Peter Zenger play in the deveopment of the newspaper in America ? (Zenger)
ENTY:substance What are the four elements ? (elements)
ENTY:other What 's the tallest piece on a chessboard ? (piece)
LOC:other What is Answers.com 's address ? (address)
ENTY:product What product did Robert Conrad dare people to knock off his shoulder ? (Conrad)
NUM:count What 's the American dollar equivalent for 8 pounds in the U.K. ? (equivalent)
ENTY:techmeth What are the different approaches of systems analysis ? (approaches)
NUM:speed What is the speed of the Mississippi River ? (speed)
ENTY:other What are the developmental stages of a swimmer ? (stages)
HUM:ind What actor first portrayed James Bond ? (actor)
LOC:other What ocean is the largest in the world ? (ocean)
NUM:date What year did Jack Nicklaus join the Professional Golfers Association tour ? (Nicklaus)
DESC:reason What causes the redness in your cheeks when you blush ? (What)
DESC:def What does it mean '' Rupee Depreciates '' ? (null)
ENTY:other What gaming devices were dubbed '' Mississippi marbles '' and '' Memphis dominoes '' ? (null)
ENTY:event What Jewish holiday saw the start of the 1973 Mideast War ? (holiday)
NUM:speed What is the speed of the Mississippi River ? (speed)
ENTY:animal What is Dudley Do-Right 's horse 's name ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What TV game show once saw a contestant admit to picking his toes in the shower ? (contestant)
HUM:ind What Soviet leader owned a Rolls-Royce ? (leader)
ENTY:event What war did Florence Nightingale tend the troops in ? (Nightingale)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviation of the company name ' General Motors ' ? (abbreviation)
LOC:mount What mountains lie between the Arkansas and Missouri rivers ? (mountains)
DESC:reason What is the function of RAM ? (function)
LOC:other What 's the closest G2 Spectrum Yellow Dwarf to Earth ? (Dwarf)
ENTY:dismed What is the fear of cockroaches called ? (fear)
ENTY:cremat What CBS soap opera was interrupted by the bulletin of John F. Kennedy 's assassination ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the use of a 24-hour clock instead of a 12-hour clock ? (use)
HUM:ind What was the name of the lawyer who represented Randy Craft ? (who)
HUM:ind What United States President had dreamed that he was assassinated ? (President)
ENTY:cremat What film did Lee Marvin win the 1965 best actor Oscar for ? (Marvin)
ENTY:product What product does '' Mrs. Olsen '' promote ? (Olsen)
NUM:date What time of day did Emperor Hirohito die ? (Hirohito)
DESC:def What is dry ice ? (ice)
ENTY:other What 's the most powerful card in Euchre ? (card)
DESC:def What does '' intractable plantar keratoma '' mean ? (keratoma)
ENTY:food What crop failure caused the Irish Famine ? (failure)
LOC:city What South Korean city is served by Kimpo International Airport ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What is the longest-running television series ? (series)
ENTY:animal What predators exist on Antarctica ? (predators)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a generator and an alternator ? (difference)
ENTY:food What beer advertised that it had '' three rings '' ? (beer)
NUM:other What is the quantity of American soldiers still unaccounted for from the Vietnam war ? (quantity)
ENTY:techmeth What golfing accessory was patented by George Grant on December 12 (null)
ENTY:other What are the different types of plastic ? (types)
LOC:mount What was the highest mountain on earth before Mount Everest was discovered ? (mountain)
LOC:country What country 's people are the top television watchers ? (watchers)
HUM:gr What Polynesian people inhabit New Zealand ? (people)
ENTY:cremat What movie tour of the Roman empire features the admonition : '' Row well and live '' ? (tour)
LOC:city What Nevada center has been dubbed The Biggest Little City in the World ? (null)
HUM:ind What President lived at 219 North Delaware Street , Independence , Missouri ? (President)
DESC:desc What is the difference between classical conditioning and operant conditioning ? (difference)
DESC:desc What are some interesting facts and information about dogsledding ? (facts)
NUM:date What year did Hitler die ? (Hitler)
HUM:ind What famous model was married to Billy Joel ? (model)
ENTY:animal What kind of animal is Babar ? (Babar)
DESC:reason What is Jane Goodall known for ? (What)
ENTY:other What killed Bob Marley ? (null)
DESC:def What does the name Billie mean ? (Billie)
LOC:mount What is the highest peak in Africa ? (peak)
LOC:other What desert has been called The Garden of Allah ? (null)
ENTY:other What do bicornate animals have two of ? (animals)
DESC:reason What function does a community 's water tower serve ? (tower)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of weakness ? (fear)
ABBR:exp What does G.M.T. stand for ? (G.M.T.)
DESC:def What does Inuit and Eskimo mean ? (Inuit)
ENTY:cremat What song served as the closing theme of The Johnny Cash Show ? (song)
ENTY:sport What field sport did dentist William Beers promote and write a standard book of rules for ? (Beers)
HUM:ind What actor 's autobiography is titled All My Yesterdays ? (null)
HUM:ind What Russian master spy lived in the U.S. under the name Emil Goldfus ? (spy)
DESC:reason What 's nature 's purpose for tornadoes ? (purpose)
ENTY:word What English word comes from the Old French covrefeu , meaning cover fire ? (word)
ENTY:instru What musical instrument did Prewitt play in James Jones 's From Here to Eternity ? (Prewitt)
DESC:reason What makes popcorn pop ? (What)
LOC:country What country did King Gustav V reign over from 197 to 195 ? (country)
NUM:speed What is the speed of the Mississippi River ? (speed)
LOC:other What is the brightest star visible from Earth ? (star)
ENTY:cremat What film marked Robert Redford 's directorial debut ? (film)
HUM:ind What was Mao 's second name ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What film or films has Jude Law appeared in ? (Law)
ENTY:lang What 's the most commonly-spoken language in Belgium ? (language)
DESC:def What are Maid-Rites ? (Rites)
ENTY:cremat What children 's tale contains the line : '' Come , Cinderslut , and hold this skein of wool for me '' ? (tale)
HUM:gr What level of government or governmental agency is responsible for dealing with racism ? (level)
ENTY:food What cocktail do you concoct with whisky and sweet vermouth ? (null)
DESC:desc What do bee hives do in cranberry bogs ? (hives)
DESC:reason What caused the Lynmouth floods ? (What)
ENTY:cremat What movie did Madilyn Kahn star in with Gene Wilder ? (null)
ENTY:other What type of bridge is the Golden Gate Bridge ? (Bridge)
HUM:ind What dictator has the nickname '' El Maximo '' ? (dictator)
HUM:gr What stereo manufacturer is '' Slightly ahead of its time '' ? (manufacturer)
LOC:city What U.S. city is The Queen of the Pacific ? (Queen)
HUM:ind What TV sitcom character had the maiden name Ethel Potter ? (character)
ENTY:food What was the first Lifesaver flavor ? (flavor)
HUM:ind What Spanish artist painted Crucifixion ? (artist)
ENTY:cremat What is the Jewish bible called ? (bible)
DESC:def What is a firewall ? (firewall)
HUM:ind What spy novelist served as Moscow correspondent for Reuter and The Times of London ? (novelist)
LOC:other What was known as the Spice Island ? (null)
ENTY:other What deck of cards includes the Wheel of Fortune , the Lovers , and Death ? (deck)
ENTY:other What does the Statue of Liberty wear on her feet ? (Statue)
ENTY:other What household facility contains a float ball , ballcock , and overflow tube ? (facility)
ENTY:animal What was the name of Betty Boop 's dog ? (name)
NUM:perc What fraction of a beaver 's life is spent swimming ? (null)
ENTY:substance What was the Bridge of San Luis Rey made of ? (Bridge)
DESC:desc What do economists do ? (economists)
LOC:country What country has the largest sheep population ? (country)
DESC:desc What do I need to do to take my dog with me to live in Dominica , West Indies for a year ? (null)
LOC:country What country is the world 's largest importer of cognac ? (importer)
ABBR:exp What does SIDS stand for ? (SIDS)
ENTY:other What is Grenada 's main commodity export ? (export)
DESC:reason What makes a clitoris sensitive ? (clitoris)
LOC:country What country has the most time zones , with 11 ? (country)
ENTY:other What '' magic '' does Mandrake employ ? (Mandrake)
ENTY:other What was introduced commercially by Bayer A.G. of Leverkusen , in 1899 ? (null)
LOC:city What city is Logan Airport in ? (Airport)
DESC:def What is a nanometer ? (nanometer)
LOC:city What is the largest city on the Great Lakes ? (city)
NUM:code What is the telephone number for the University of Kentucky ? (number)
ENTY:product What product on the market is good for hiding facial scars ? (product)
LOC:city What city gained renown for its pea-soup fogs ? (city)
DESC:def What does '' Janelle '' mean ? (Janelle)
DESC:desc What are the distinct physical characterstics of the Arabian horse ? (characterstics)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of thunder ? (fear)
ENTY:animal What animal has killed the most people ? (animal)
LOC:city What Russian seaport has a name meaning '' Lord of the East '' ? (seaport)
ENTY:other What kind of file has the extension .dbf ? (kind)
ENTY:termeq What then-derogatory term was applied to the painters Monet , Sisley , Pissarro , Renoir and Degas ? (null)
DESC:def What is a wop ? (wop)
HUM:gr What is the best college in the country ? (college)
DESC:def What is viscosity ? (viscosity)
ENTY:cremat What was the name of the sitcom that Alyssa Milano starred in with Tony Danza ? (Milano)
LOC:country What are the Nordic nations ? (nations)
LOC:state What U.S. state borders Illinois to the north ? (null)
NUM:temp What is the temperature for baking Peachy Oat Muffins ? (temperature)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of bees ? (fear)
ENTY:cremat What Vladimir Nabokov novel features Professor Humbert in love with a 12-year-old girl ? (novel)
DESC:def What is a green bog ? (bog)
ENTY:other What does a chairbound basophobic fear ? (null)
LOC:city What city is served by Logan International Airport ? (null)
HUM:ind What wrestling star became '' The Incredible Hulk '' ? (star)
LOC:other What attracts tourists to Reims ? (What)
ENTY:sport What game do Steve McQueen and Edward G. Robinson play in The Cincinnati Kid ? (McQueen)
ENTY:other What fastener did Whitcomb Judson patent in 1893 ? (fastener)
DESC:def What 's an auberge in France ? (auberge)
HUM:gr What army was founded by William Booth and his wife Catherine ? (null)
ENTY:substance What does ribavirin consist of ? (What)
LOC:other What is the web address of the list of e-mail addresses of members of the House of Representatives ? (address)
HUM:ind What was her real name ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What was the name of that popular song the Creeps sang ? (Creeps)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of being alone ? (fear)
ENTY:food What do you get by adding Lactobacillus bulgaricus to milk ? (null)
ENTY:plant What plant has the largest seed ? (plant)
LOC:country What was the only country you were allowed to drive into Israel from in 1979 ? (country)
ENTY:other What 's approaching when a cyclist shouts : '' Oil '' ? (cyclist)
HUM:ind What baseball star turned down a $1 , 000-a-year contract because he felt he had n't earned it ? (star)
ENTY:sport What kind of sport is often associated with hooligans ? (null)
HUM:ind What video game hero do some of his fans call Chomper ? (hero)
ENTY:word What is the longest word in the English language ? (word)
HUM:ind What TV comediennes 's characters include former movie star Nora Desmond , secretary Mrs. Wiggins and a housewife named Eunice ? (characters)
ENTY:animal What is '' the bear of beers '' ? (bear)
DESC:def What does the name '' Justin '' mean ? (Justin)
NUM:perc What percentage of the body is muscle ? (muscle)
ENTY:color What color of dry wine should be served with veal roasts and chops ? (null)
ENTY:substance What is a golf ball made of ? (ball)
DESC:def What is the Amish religion ? (religion)
NUM:money What does an average daycare provider get paid in New England ? (null)
HUM:gr What was the name of the 187s Irish terrorist group in Pennsylvania mining areas ? (name)
DESC:def What is the '' coppertop '' battery ? (battery)
ENTY:symbol What sign is The Water Carrier the zodiacal symbol for ? (Carrier)
ENTY:animal What animals do you find in the stock market ? (null)
DESC:def What is color ? (color)
ENTY:cremat What did Shostakovich write for Rostropovich ? (Shostakovich)
HUM:ind What first name was Nipsy Russell given at birth ? (Russell)
DESC:def What is a Jellicle Cat ? (Cat)
LOC:other What is Bill Gates of Microsoft E-mail address ? (Gates)
ENTY:substance What is the second hardest substance ? (substance)
LOC:city What Russian city boasts the Hermitage Museum ? (city)
DESC:reason What makes a tornado turn ? (tornado)
ENTY:color What two colors are you blind to if you suffer from protanopia ? (colors)
ENTY:cremat What was the name of the movie that starred Sharon Stone and Arnold Schwarzenegger ? (name)
DESC:def What is artificial intelligence ? (intelligence)
ENTY:food What do flatfish eat ? (null)
ENTY:other What can I use to remove the stubborn gummed labels from some diskettes ? (null)
NUM:date What day of the week sees the most fatal car accidents ? (day)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word , magic ? (magic)
ENTY:sport What sport do you shag flies in ? (null)
DESC:def What is white chocolate ? (chocolate)
ENTY:food What kind of wine is Spumante ? (Spumante)
DESC:def What does the name Gina mean ? (Gina)
ENTY:product What is the most advanced handheld calculator in the world ? (calculator)
ENTY:termeq What is the belt of low pressure around the equator called ? (belt)
DESC:def What are shooting stars ? (What)
LOC:other What 's the tallest building in New York City ? (building)
DESC:desc What is the Motto for the State of Maryland ? (Motto)
ENTY:cremat What kind of books does Fodor 's publish ? (null)
HUM:ind What are the first names of Rowan and Martin , the stars of TV 's Laugh-In ? (names)
NUM:ord What chapter of the Bible has the most verses ? (chapter)
HUM:ind What Asian leader was known as The Little Brown Saint ? (null)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviated expression for the National Bureau of Investigation ? (expression)
LOC:mount What is the highest mountain in the world ? (mountain)
LOC:other What arch can you see from the Place de la Concorde ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of passing high objects ? (fear)
DESC:desc What do players try to do when the music stops in a game of musical chairs ? (music)
HUM:ind What are the top ten most common girl names in the US ? (names)
ENTY:other What is the rarest coin ? (coin)
ENTY:cremat What Judith Rossner novel was made into a film starring Diane Keaton ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of parasites ? (fear)
HUM:ind What was the name of the daughter of the Virginia chief Powhatan that married John Rolfe ? (name)
LOC:state What is the leading pecan and peanut growing state ? (state)
DESC:desc What does a nihilist believe in ? (nihilist)
DESC:desc What did Richard Feynman say upon hearing he would receive the Nobel Prize in Physics ? (Feynman)
ENTY:cremat What 2 statues did France give to other countries ? (France)
DESC:def What are amphibians ? (amphibians)
HUM:ind What 's the nickname of oddsmaker Jimmy Snyder ? (nickname)
ENTY:dismed What is the fear of being loved ? (fear)
NUM:other What was the number of people that Randy Steven Craft was convicted of killing ? (number)
HUM:title What was Queen Victoria 's title regarding India ? (title)
ENTY:food What type of food makes you fat ? (type)
ENTY:dismed What is the name of the chronic neurological autoimmune disease which attacks the protein sheath that surrounds nerve cells causing a gradual loss of movement in the body ? (name)
NUM:count What was the U.S. highway death toll in 1969 ? (toll)
ENTY:animal What kind of animals are Dorsets , Lincolns , Oxfords and Southdowns ? (Dorsets)
ENTY:cremat What are the shortest and the longest songs ever produced ? (What)
ENTY:letter What letter is to the right of K on a typewriter keyboard ? (letter)
DESC:desc What is the origin and the meaning of the name , '' Hajo ? '' (origin)
ENTY:word What is the plural of gulf ? (plural)
NUM:date What year did the United States pass the Copyright law ? (States)
NUM:perc What percentage of Americans own their homes ? (percentage)
NUM:date What 's the first day of the week ? (day)
LOC:city What city was President William McKinley shot in ? (McKinley)
LOC:city What city has the world 's longest subway system ? (city)
DESC:def What is Bombay duck ? (duck)
HUM:ind What double talking '' professor '' holds a doctorate in Nothing ? (What)
LOC:city What are the five most expensive cities in the world ? (cities)
HUM:ind What 19th-century writer had a country estate on the Hudson dubbed Sunnyside ? (Hudson)
DESC:def What is a virtual IP address ? (address)
HUM:ind What was the name of the cook on Rawhide ? (name)
LOC:other What county is Chicago in ? (Chicago)
NUM:dist What is the wingspan of a condor ? (wingspan)
DESC:desc What facial feature typically contains about 55 hairs ? (feature)
ENTY:termeq What 's the literary term for a play on words ? (term)
ENTY:color What color were their horses ? (horses)
NUM:money What does an average daycare provider get paid in New England ? (null)
HUM:ind What author landed a 468-pound marlin without harness in the early 193 's ? (author)
ENTY:other What kind of education do I need to become a flight attendant ? (attendant)
ENTY:lang What are the two languages of Malta ? (languages)
DESC:desc What happened during the Blackhawk Indian war of 1832 ? (What)
DESC:def What does the Latin ante mortem mean ? (mortem)
DESC:def What does the name Shawn mean ? (name)
HUM:ind What lawyer won the largest divorce settlement , $85 million , in U.S. history for Sheika Dena Al-Farri ? (lawyer)
ENTY:animal What do you call a group of geese ? (null)
LOC:other What is the longest place name in the U.S. ? (name)
NUM:perc What percent liked Thatcher after she had been in power for a decade ? (percent)
ENTY:cremat What was Mel Gibson 's first movie ? (movie)
ENTY:animal What horse did Zorro ride ? (Zorro)
HUM:ind What former major-league left-handed baseball pitcher was known as '' Space Man '' ? (null)
HUM:ind What was Michelangelo 's last name ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What was Connecticut 's first constitution called ? (constitution)
ENTY:event What historical event happened in Dogtown in 1899 ? (event)
DESC:def What is being done about the millennium bug ? (null)
DESC:reason What was the claim to fame of King Camp Gillette ? (claim)
ENTY:dismed What is the most common kind of skin cancer in the U.S. ? (kind)
DESC:def What is Olestra ? (Olestra)
LOC:country What Asian country has a bill of rights for cows ? (country)
ENTY:plant What are two plants that clothes are made from ? (plants)
ENTY:food What is the most heavily caffeinated soft drink ? (drink)
HUM:ind What President-to-be was the first member of Congress to enlist following the attack on Pearl Harbor ? (member)
NUM:money What was the price of Varian Associates ' vacuum products division ? (price)
ENTY:lang What language is mostly spoken in Brazil ? (null)
HUM:gr What college produced the most winning Super Bowl quarterbacks ? (college)
DESC:def What is prepared mustard ? (null)
HUM:ind What classical Spanish writer warned : '' All that glitters is not gold '' ? (gold)
DESC:def What does '' antidisestablishmentarianism '' mean ? (antidisestablishmentarianism)
HUM:ind What actor married John F. Kennedy 's sister ? (actor)
ENTY:dismed What does a topophobic actor suffer from ? (actor)
ENTY:other What type of hunting are retrievers used for ? (retrievers)
DESC:reason What is Colin Powell best known for ? (Powell)
LOC:city What city is the setting for Puccini 's opera La Boheme ? (setting)
HUM:ind What U.S. President showed a fondness for munching on bee pollen bars ? (President)
DESC:def What is measured in curies ? (null)
HUM:ind What former president 's daughter has written a book titled Murder in the White House ? (daughter)
HUM:ind What fictional character is known as the '' melancholy Dane '' ? (null)
HUM:ind What longtime game show host dropped dead while jogging in Central Park in 1984 ? (host)
DESC:def What is the meaning of W.B. Yeat 's poem , '' The Three Hermits ? '' (meaning)
ENTY:dismed What infectious disease is the world 's deadliest ? (disease)
DESC:def What is Spumante ? (Spumante)
DESC:def What is an isthmus ? (isthmus)
ENTY:animal What was the name of the orca that died of a fungal infection ? (name)
ENTY:animal What is Mississippi 's state animal ? (animal)
DESC:desc What 's the origin of the word ' news ' ? (origin)
ENTY:other What did Dan Aykroyd and John Belushi quit Saturday Night Live to become ? (Aykroyd)
HUM:ind What is the real name of disc jockey '' Wolfman Jack '' ? (name)
ENTY:veh What Italian liner was hijacked in 1985 ? (null)
LOC:city What city houses the U.S. headquarters of Procter and Gamble ? (null)
ENTY:product What soap was touted as being '' for people who like people '' ? (who)
ABBR:exp What does NAFTA stand for ? (NAFTA)
HUM:gr What new middle school was built in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania last year ? (null)
ENTY:techmeth What are some tips for building a fire in a fireplace ? (tips)
ENTY:food What do manatees eat ? (manatees)
ENTY:cremat What were popular songs and types of songs in the 1920s ? (songs)
ENTY:other What is November 's birthstone ? (birthstone)
DESC:def What is a Certified Nurse Midwife ? (Midwife)
ENTY:cremat What Boris Pasternak book sold 5 , 0 copies to become the fiction best-seller of 1958 ? (seller)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the expression '' tout de suite '' ? (origin)
ENTY:word What is the longest English word ? (word)
DESC:reason What is the purpose of a car bra ? (purpose)
DESC:reason What is D.B. Cooper known for ? (Cooper)
ENTY:animal What species is a colt ? (colt)
ABBR:exp What is the full name of the PLO ? (name)
LOC:country What is the smallest country in Africa ? (country)
ENTY:event What age followed the Bronze Age ? (age)
HUM:title What is her profession ? (profession)
HUM:ind What is the full name of the man who invented the multicolored game cube that has 42.3 quintillion potential combinations ? (who)
ABBR:exp What does the word LASER mean ? (LASER)
DESC:def What does the name '' Anthony '' mean ? (name)
DESC:def What is a rhomboideus minor ? (What)
HUM:ind What U.S. Congressman said : '' Keep the faith , baby '' . (Congressman)
NUM:other What is the student population at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst ? (population)
HUM:gr What party was Winston Churchill a member of ? (Churchill)
HUM:gr What American League baseball team 's worst finish between 1926 and 1964 was fourth ? (finish)
LOC:state What state does Martha Stewart live in ? (Stewart)
LOC:country What are the Benelux countries ? (countries)
ENTY:lang What is a language spoken by the Sioux ? (language)
HUM:ind What American poet wrote : '' Good fences make good neighbors '' ? (fences)
LOC:state What state in the U.S. has the most blacks ? (state)
HUM:title What was the occupation of Mandy Rice-Davies ? (occupation)
LOC:city What is the city in which Maurizio Pellegrin lives called ? (city)
ENTY:animal What breed of dog was the '' Little Rascals '' dog ? (dog)
DESC:desc What are the living conditions in Cuba ? (conditions)
ENTY:color What color are school buses ? (buses)
LOC:other What is the oldest website on the Internet ? (website)
ENTY:event What events happened January 26 , 1978 ? (events)
HUM:ind What explorers followed Columbus to the Americas ? (explorers)
DESC:def What are the seven virtues ? (virtues)
ENTY:termeq What other name were the '' Little Rascals '' known as ? (Rascals)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of food ? (fear)
NUM:date What year did the Vietnam War end ? (null)
HUM:ind What are the names of Richard Nixon 's two daughters ? (names)
ENTY:word What 's the word for broken glass or sharp rocks embedded in cement on top of a wall ? (word)
NUM:count What is the chromosome number of an elephant ? (number)
HUM:gr What organization was founded by the Rev. Jerry Falwell ? (null)
LOC:other What 's the longest river in the world ? (river)
HUM:gr What company is being bought by Yahoo and how much is the deal worth ? (worth)
NUM:date What year did Germany sign its nonaggression pact with the Soviet Union ? (Germany)
LOC:mount What mountain range is traversed by the highest railroad in the world ? (null)
LOC:other What 's the sacred river of India ? (river)
LOC:country What is Stefan Edberg 's native country ? (country)
ENTY:body What is the only gland in humans that can regenerate itself ? (gland)
ENTY:event What astronomical phenomenon takes place in Jan. 1999 ? (phenomenon)
DESC:desc What information can you get me on Fairground Park in St. Louis (null)
HUM:ind What was American folk hero John Chapman 's nickname ? (nickname)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a median and a mean ? (difference)
ENTY:cremat What was the top box office movie in April 1998 ? (movie)
DESC:reason What makes thunder ? (What)
HUM:ind What author did photographer Yousuf Karsh call '' the shiest man I ever met '' ? (author)
ENTY:plant What plant is rum made from ? (rum)
LOC:country What country are Godiva chocolates from ? (chocolates)
LOC:state What U.S. state records the least rainfall ? (rainfall)
DESC:def What was archy , and mehitabel ? (What)
LOC:city What Texas city got its name from the Spanish for '' yellow '' ? (city)
ENTY:substance What are the chemicals used in glowsticks ? (chemicals)
LOC:country What country did the Nile River originate in ? (River)
ENTY:color What color are tennis balls ? (balls)
HUM:ind What barroom judge called himself The Law West of the Pecos ? (judge)
DESC:desc What excuse did the NATO people give for hitting the Chinese embassy ? (people)
ENTY:sport What sports event is Meyer Wolfsheim supposed to have fixed in The Great Gatsby ? (event)
LOC:country What country has the best defensive position in the board game Diplomacy ? (country)
LOC:country What two countries share the Khyber Pass ? (countries)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the surname of Braun ? (origin)
ENTY:sport What card game has variations called Canfield , Klondike and Spider ? (game)
DESC:def What is Australia Day ? (Day)
ENTY:animal What mammal of North America is the world 's longest-lived for its size ? (mammal)
DESC:def What was the Chivington Massacre ? (Massacre)
HUM:ind What actor starred in 1980 's Blue Lagoon , 1982 's The Pirate Movie and 1983 's A Night in Heaven ? (actor)
ENTY:termeq What is the dialogue circle in cartoons called ? (circle)
DESC:def What does the word camaro mean , from the GM car the Camaro ? (camaro)
DESC:def What is the AIM-54C Phoenix ? (Phoenix)
ENTY:sport What sport is Chris Jogis a top player of ? (Jogis)
LOC:other What 's the second-largest island in the world ? (island)
DESC:def What is the definition of low island ? (definition)
NUM:date What century does Captain Video live in ? (Video)
ENTY:other What types of water pollution are there ? (types)
ENTY:food What soft drink would provide me with the biggest intake of caffeine ? (drink)
ENTY:other What 's the name of a golf course in Myrtle Beach ? (name)
ENTY:event What are some of the significant historical events of the 1990s ? (What)
DESC:desc What is the difference between Neoclassical art and Romanticism art ? (difference)
HUM:ind What golfer has been called Ohio Fats and Blobbo ? (null)
NUM:money What is the average cost for four years of medical school ? (cost)
ENTY:other What does God create in the first sentence of the Bible ? (God)
NUM:money What is the current ticket fare from from Cairo to Barbados ? (fare)
ABBR:exp What does NN O '' mean when used as a prefix in Irish surnames ? (O)
LOC:state What is the state nickname of Mississippi ? (nickname)
DESC:reason What is Black Hills , South Dakota most famous for ? (Hills)
ENTY:cremat What 1966 boob tube bomb took astronauts back to prehistoric times ? (bomb)
ENTY:event What holidays are celebrated in Ireland ? (null)
DESC:def What are the Greek numerals ? (numerals)
LOC:other What 's the name of the temple that is located near the capital city of Laos ? (name)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of sleep ? (fear)
ENTY:sport What auto race was Wilbur Reed the first to win three times ? (Reed)
ENTY:animal What are the most common breeding birds in the U.S. ? (birds)
ENTY:event What was organized as a Confederate veterans ' social club in Pulaski , in Tennessee , in 1866 ? (null)
DESC:desc What is an example of an actual case of using the Fourteenth Amendment ? (example)
HUM:ind What singer became despondent over the death of Freddie Prinze , quit show business , and then quit the business ? (singer)
ENTY:termeq What was Mark Johnson referring to when he said : '' I still can 't believe it- we beat the Russians ? '' (Johnson)
ENTY:product What car was driven in the 199 release of '' Smokey and the Bandit '' ? (null)
HUM:gr What was the backup singing group for Roy Rogers ? (group)
HUM:ind What famous singing cowboy owns the California Angels baseball team ? (cowboy)
ENTY:cremat What 1915 film was the first to gross $5 million ? (film)
DESC:reason What causes someone to be ticklish ? (someone)
NUM:perc What is the probability that at least 2 out of 25 people will have the same birthday ? (people)
ENTY:instru What musical instrument did Sherlock Holmes play ? (Holmes)
DESC:def What is '' the washed vodka '' ? (vodka)
NUM:date What year was Desmond Mpilo Tutu awarded the Nobel Peace Prize ? (Tutu)
ENTY:termeq What 's a '' Drinker respirator '' better known as ? (respirator)
HUM:title What title did Suzette Charles assume for two months in 1984 ? (Charles)
HUM:ind What was the infamous pseudonym of Peter Sutcliffe ? (pseudonym)
ENTY:animal What is Smokey The Bear 's middle name ? (name)
HUM:title What is Nicholas Cage 's occupation ? (occupation)
ENTY:cremat What British TV series featured Emma Peel ? (series)
LOC:other What London street is the home of British journalism ? (home)
ENTY:event What tragedy befell the city of Dogtown in 1899 ? (tragedy)
DESC:def What is the Immaculate Conception ? (Conception)
ENTY:veh What are the names of all the U.S. Navy aircraft carriers ? (names)
ENTY:other What format was VHS 's main competition ? (competition)
DESC:def What is Candlemas Day ? (Day)
ENTY:termeq What does the Ouarterly Review of Doublespeak call an '' inoperative statement '' ? (Review)
DESC:def What is a pyrotechnic display ? (display)
HUM:gr What Japanese manufacturer is known for both its pianos and its motorcycles ? (null)
NUM:other What is the chemical reactivity of argon ? (reactivity)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the term '' The Brooklyn Side '' in bowling ? (origin)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of being cold ? (fear)
ENTY:sport What net game sees its women 's world amateur champions receive the Uber Cup ? (champions)
ENTY:animal What four-legged creature did a Cornell University study say would make man 's best companion in space ? (creature)
NUM:weight What does a teaspoon of matter weigh in a black hole ? (null)
ENTY:other What did British companies stick 175 , 0 tons of tea into in 1982 ? (companies)
LOC:state What province is Edmonton located in ? (null)
ENTY:animal What is California 's state bird ? (bird)
NUM:date What is Martin Luther King Jr. 's real birthday ? (birthday)
ENTY:veh What 's the name of Jacques Cousteau 's research ship ? (name)
HUM:ind What President dispatched a cruiser to carry Charles Lindbergh home after his epic flight ? (President)
ENTY:animal What bird can swim but can 't fly ? (bird)
DESC:def What is Plc ? (Plc)
ENTY:cremat What Dickens novel has David carrying the message '' Barkis is willin '' to Peggy ? (willin)
DESC:def What is a hyperlink ? (hyperlink)
NUM:money What is the per-capita income of Colombia , South America , ? (income)
ENTY:cremat What novel has Big Brother watching ? (Brother)
DESC:def What does Elysium mean ? (Elysium)
LOC:other What is the oldest website on the Internet ? (website)
DESC:def What is Shalom ? (Shalom)
ENTY:sport What was the favorite sport of Tom Wolfe 's The Pump House Gang ? (sport)
ENTY:substance What organic fuel do bog-dwellers use a '' slane '' to cut ? (dwellers)
NUM:period What is the average age of a member of the team that worked on the Manhatten Project ? (age)
LOC:country What country received all the Nobel Prizes awarded in 1976 ? (country)
ENTY:food What soft drink first appeared in the Old Corner Drug Store in Waco , Texas , in 1885 ? (drink)
LOC:other What is Britain 's possession on the Chinese mainland ? (possession)
DESC:desc What is the origin of thank you notes ? (origin)
ENTY:other What did Jimmy Stewart invent ? (Stewart)
ENTY:other What generation am I in ? (generation)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of hell ? (fear)
ENTY:substance What is Jell-O made from ? (O)
LOC:state What are the only two states that incorporate the Confederate battle flag in their flags ? (states)
ENTY:food What 's the Southern dish made of pigs ' small intestines ? (dish)
DESC:def What is the executor in a will ? (executor)
HUM:gr What inescapable purveyor of background music celebrated its 5th anniversary in July , 1984 ? (purveyor)
ENTY:food What soft drink is most heavily caffeinated ? (drink)
DESC:desc What is the difference between microprocessors & microcontrollers ? (difference)
LOC:other What are tourist attractions in Reims ? (attractions)
NUM:dist What are the lengths of pearl necklaces ? (lengths)
DESC:desc What is the proof that houseplants metabolize carcinogens ? (houseplants)
DESC:reason What prompted the co-pilot of the Enola Gay to enter only '' My God '' in his log ? (What)
LOC:city What Colorado city owns its own glacier ? (city)
DESC:desc What is the history of '' the toast '' ? (history)
ENTY:event What was the name of the Protestant revolt against the supremacy of the Pope ? (name)
DESC:def What is an arab strap ? (strap)
LOC:country What two countries ' coastlines border the Bay of Biscay ? (coastlines)
HUM:gr What organization did Mr. Waverly assign agents for ? (Waverly)
HUM:ind What are the characters ' names in the Scooby-Doo cartoon ? (names)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of cold ? (fear)
HUM:title What was Eduard Shevardnadze 's job in the Soviet Union ? (job)
DESC:reason What causes rust ? (What)
ENTY:animal What was the monster in Spielberg 's film '' Jaws '' ? (monster)
ENTY:color What color is an Arctic fox in winter ? (fox)
DESC:def What do the names Neil , Mary , and Anthony mean ? (Neil)
LOC:city What European capital celebrated its 2 , 000th anniversary in 1951 ? (capital)
ENTY:plant What flower did Vincent Van Gogh paint ? (null)
LOC:country What country was the setting of You Only Live Twice ? (setting)
NUM:perc What was Thatcher 's approval rating after 10 years in power ? (rating)
DESC:desc What was the first Funk 'N Lata , Brazilian group , success ? (Lata)
DESC:def What is a handheld PC ? (PC)
DESC:desc What did John Hinckley do to impress Jodie Foster ? (Hinckley)
HUM:title What is Larry King 's job ? (job)
ENTY:event What war saw a naval battle between the luxury liners Cap Trafalgar and the Carmania ? (war)
ENTY:techmeth What is the treatment for depression ? (treatment)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of slime ? (fear)
LOC:country What country in Latin America is the largest one ? (country)
HUM:ind What feathered cartoon characters do Yugoslavians know as Vlaja , Gaja , and Raja ? (Yugoslavians)
ENTY:cremat What Marx Brothers movie centers on a stolen painting ? (null)
DESC:desc What was unusual about Alexandra 's appearance in Josie and the Pussycats ? (What)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word '' mind '' ? (origin)
ENTY:sport What game is fatal to anybody over 21 ? (game)
NUM:other What is the death toll of people dying from tuberculosis ? (people)
DESC:desc What happened to Moon Maiden ? (What)
LOC:city What city is wiener schnitzel named for ? (city)
DESC:def What are the Urals ? (Urals)
LOC:other What desert has the highest sand dunes ? (desert)
LOC:country What two countries contain Sierra Nevada mountains ? (countries)
NUM:code What phone number can I call to have a tree planted ? (tree)
ENTY:techmeth What are the four natural aids used in riding a horse ? (aids)
LOC:other What continent 's name appears on the upper left corner of a Budweiser label ? (name)
NUM:date What day is August 13 , 1971 ? (August)
ENTY:cremat What literary classic centers on the search for a treasure in gold worth 7 , 0 pounds ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the origin of blue for boys and pink for girls ? (origin)
ENTY:cremat What is the name of the Michelangelo painting that shows two hands with fingers touching ? (fingers)
DESC:def What is the Hub of London ? (Hub)
DESC:reason What causes panic attacks ? (What)
DESC:def What was the filling in the first golf balls ? (filling)
ENTY:dismed What drug did Sigmund Freud become fascinated with while experimenting with the treatment of neurasthenia ? (Freud)
LOC:country What country was A Terrible Beauty to Leon Uris ? (Beauty)
DESC:def What is typhoid fever ? (fever)
DESC:def What are the Twin Cities ? (Cities)
ENTY:cremat What is Beethoven 's 9th symphony called ? (symphony)
ABBR:exp What does Ms. , Miss , and Mrs. stand for ? (Ms.)
LOC:other What is the Homelite Inc. home page ? (page)
ENTY:substance What explosive do you get by mixing charcoal , sulfur and saltpeter ? (null)
LOC:other What mountainous region of the world is the Lhasa Apso dog native to ? (region)
ENTY:dismed What cancer is commonly associated with AIDS ? (null)
NUM:date What year did Rossetti paint '' Beata Beatrix '' ? (null)
HUM:gr What record company produced the 1978 movie The Wiz ? (company)
ENTY:other What did The Gas House Gang play ? (null)
HUM:ind What is the name of actor Rex Harrison 's son , who starred in a modestly popular TV show during the late 1960's ? (who)
DESC:def What is the highest Roman numeral ? (numeral)
ENTY:other What 's the most popular form of bridge ? (form)
HUM:ind What comedian has a legendary reputation for stealing jokes ? (comedian)
ENTY:cremat What are the first ten amendements passed ? (amendements)
ENTY:dismed What is another term for the painful wrist syndrome ? (term)
DESC:desc What 's the difference between sleet and freezing rain ? (difference)
ENTY:sport What game is Garry Kasparov really good at ? (Kasparov)
ENTY:cremat What novel did Ian Fleming introduce James Bond in ? (Fleming)
NUM:perc What was the target rate for M3 growth in 1992 ? (rate)
HUM:gr What baseball team was routinely called '' dem bums '' by its frustrated fans ? (null)
DESC:desc What are the major differences in the Catholic and Methodist religions ? (differences)
HUM:gr What is the best Internet business to go into ? (business)
DESC:def What does Venus Retrograde mean ? (Venus)
LOC:other What are the largest breweries in the world ? (breweries)
DESC:def What does Las Vegas mean ? (Vegas)
DESC:def What does the word '' meta '' mean ? (meta)
ENTY:other What keeps clouds in the air ? (What)
ENTY:termeq What 's the term for any four-sided figure ? (term)
LOC:country What country and western singer is known as The Silver Fox ? (null)
LOC:other What building appropriately enough is depicted on the back of the 1-dollar bill ? (null)
DESC:def What is graduate school ? (school)
DESC:desc What is the difference between New York-style and Chicago-style pizza ? (difference)
HUM:ind What baseball team owner and sailor is known as The Mouth of the South ? (null)
ENTY:sport What type of betting is used in horse racing ? (null)
ENTY:product What kind of hat does Bat Masterson wear ? (Masterson)
HUM:ind What is the Viking Prince 's first name ? (name)
ABBR:exp What does the abbreviation cwt. ? (abbreviation)
HUM:ind What boxer 's life story is titled Raging Bull ? (null)
HUM:ind What Nobel laureate was expelled from the Philippines before the conference on East Timor ? (null)
HUM:ind What woman has carried the most multiple births , twins , triplets , etc. , ? (woman)
NUM:period What is the average time it takes for a male to ejaculate ? (time)
LOC:other What is website of the International Court of Justice ? (website)
ENTY:substance What is the only substance that gives food its '' taste '' when eaten ? (substance)
DESC:def What is pandoro ? (What)
ABBR:exp What do the letters ZIP stand for in the phrase '' ZIP code '' ? (letters)
LOC:city What is one of the cities that the University of Minnesota is located in ? (What)
DESC:desc What are the words to '' My Way '' written by Paul Anka ? (words)
ENTY:techmeth What is the quickest and easiest way to get nail polish out of clothes ? (way)
ENTY:other What 's the No. 1 killer in industrialized countries ? (killer)
HUM:ind What daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn became queen of England ? (queen)
HUM:gr What 's the most common nickname of U.S. college football teams ? (nickname)
DESC:desc What 's the distinction of U.S. Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall ? (distinction)
LOC:other What is the most useful site on the Internet ? (site)
LOC:mount What is the world 's highest peak ? (peak)
DESC:def What was a Mae West on a World War II battleship ? (West)
HUM:ind What comedienne upstaged Dwight D. Eisenhower 's first inauguration by giving birth to her first child ? (comedienne)
DESC:def What are amicable numbers ? (numbers)
LOC:city What 's the largest U.S. city on the Great Lakes ? (city)
ENTY:cremat What magazine gives us the cream , not the skim ? (magazine)
ENTY:techmeth What does the technique called '' cold fusion '' produce ? (technique)
HUM:ind What costume designer decided that Michael Jackson should only wear one glove ? (Jackson)
ENTY:other What meter did Shakespeare use in writing : '' To be , or not to be , that is the question.. . '' ? (question..)
NUM:count What is the goat population of the world ? (population)
HUM:gr What company was the original sponsor of TV 's Superman ? (sponsor)
ENTY:termeq What term does a Czech use to describe a Pole ? (term)
LOC:other What sea separates Naples and Algiers ? (sea)
ENTY:substance What are the most common elements in seawater ? (elements)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the ethnic category '' caucasian '' ? (origin)
DESC:def What is a stratocaster ? (stratocaster)
ENTY:other What kind of science is cosmology ? (cosmology)
ENTY:substance What 's the second-lightest element ? (element)
ENTY:termeq What do you call a '' twirl '' in ballet ? (null)
ENTY:product What is the brand name of daminozide ? (name)
ENTY:termeq What is the former name of Zimbabwe ? (name)
HUM:ind What National Basketball Association superstar told his story in Giant Steps ? (superstar)
ENTY:animal What animals did The Amazing Three masquerade as ? (animals)
LOC:country What country claimed Rubens , Van Dyck and Bruegel as citizens ? (country)
ENTY:event What civil war was fought between 1936 and 1939 ? (null)
HUM:ind What character did Tex Avery first create upon arriving at MGM ? (Avery)
HUM:ind What Asian spiritual and political leader was married at the age of 13 ? (leader)
DESC:def What is the half-life of P-32 ? (life)
LOC:other What ocean does Mauritania border ? (null)
DESC:desc What do Christian Scientists believe in ? (Scientists)
ENTY:event What World War I battle saw 6 , 0 troops killed in one day ? (null)
LOC:country What country is Kosovo a part of ? (Kosovo)
ENTY:product What computer operating system is on the most computers ? (system)
LOC:other What is Bill Gross 's email address ? (address)
DESC:desc What is the economic impact of unemployment on the economy ? (impact)
ABBR:exp What do the letters D.C. stand for in Washington , D.C. ? (letters)
ENTY:animal What animals can live the longest without food ? (animals)
HUM:ind What English queen had seventeen children ? (queen)
NUM:other What is the approximate population of Las Vegas , N.M ? (population)
HUM:ind What two baseball players make up the battery ? (players)
ENTY:letter What 's the largest letter in Salvador Dali 's signature ? (letter)
ENTY:termeq What does an irate car owner call iron oxide ? (owner)
LOC:state What 's the northernmost U.S. state apart from Alaska ? (state)
ENTY:instru What musical instrument did Prewitt play in James Jones 's From Here to Eternity ? (Prewitt)
DESC:def What is the Home Rule Act ? (Act)
LOC:other What building are British monarchs crowned in ? (monarchs)
DESC:def What are Bellworts ? (Bellworts)
ENTY:cremat What movie told of Anna Anderson 's claim to be a Russian czar 's daughter ? (daughter)
ENTY:animal What kind of creature is a coot ? (coot)
LOC:country What country was first to use the airplane as a weapon of war , against the Turks in Libya ? (country)
HUM:gr What university was Woodrow Wilson President of ? (President)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of disease ? (fear)
ENTY:food What kind of meat is Fray Bentos synonymous with ? (null)
ENTY:other What did Mr. Magoo flog on TV for General Electric ? (Magoo)
DESC:desc What are the words to the Canadian National anthem ? (words)
ENTY:termeq What is the name of the Jewish alphabet ? (name)
NUM:code What is Columbia Tristar 's phone number ? (number)
LOC:city What is the capital of Burkina Faso ? (capital)
LOC:other What continent is Bolivia on ? (Bolivia)
DESC:reason What caused Shea & Gould to close their L.A. office ? (Shea)
ENTY:animal What 's the only mammal that can 't jump ? (mammal)
LOC:state What U.S. state has the most blondes ? (state)
ENTY:event What war saw battles at Parrot 's Beak and Black Virgin ? (war)
NUM:count What was the U.S. highway death toll in 1969 ? (toll)
DESC:def What does the name Kelly mean ? (name)
DESC:def What is a phalanx ? (phalanx)
HUM:ind What mustachioed comedian portrayed Frankie in North to Alaska ? (comedian)
NUM:money What does each of the utilities cost in Monopoly ? (null)
HUM:ind What actor and World War II airman had a $5 , 0 bounty put on his head by Hermann Goering ? (bounty)
ABBR:exp What does e.g. stand for ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is the name of the medical condition in which a baby is born without a brain ? (name)
LOC:city What city is often called The Insurance Capital of the World ? (null)
ENTY:animal What are the three animals in Sheila Burnford 's The Incredible Journey ? (animals)
HUM:ind What President 's favorite Biblical quotation was : '' Come now , and let us reason together '' . (quotation)
LOC:country What country was Sir Edmund Hillary born in ? (country)
ENTY:animal What 's an infant seal called ? (seal)
DESC:desc What was the proper Laugh-In respones to : '' Say goodnight , Dick '' ? (Dick)
LOC:city What city was John F. Kennedy nominated for president in ? (Kennedy)
ENTY:cremat What 1963 Joseph L. Mankiewicz film cost $28 million ? (film)
HUM:gr What Japanese electronics company was named for a coastal city northeast of Tokyo ? (null)
NUM:money What can you be fined for having a dog on a beach ? (null)
HUM:ind What mystery writer penned '' ...the glory that was Greece , and the grandeur that was Rome '' ? (Rome)
LOC:state What state full of milk and honey was the destination in The Grapes of Wrath ? (destination)
LOC:other What is the tallest building in Japan ? (building)
ENTY:event What are some important events of the 1830 's ? (events)
ENTY:letter What letter adorns the flag of Rwanda ? (letter)
ENTY:other What did 8 , CD NNS VBP TO VB NNP POS NN . (null)
DESC:def What is God ? (God)
LOC:country What country 's northernmost city is Darwin ? (Darwin)
LOC:other What sound does Olympia , Washington , overlook ? (Washington)
ENTY:cremat What TV show chronicled the lives of Katy Holstrum and Congressman Glen Morley ? (show)
LOC:city What Kentucky city calls itself The Horse Center of America ? (city)
ENTY:substance What 's the most abundant element in the sun ? (element)
LOC:country What European country boasts the city of Furth , found where the rivers Rednitz and Pegnitz converge ? (rivers)
LOC:state What U.S. state is Dixville Notch in ? (Notch)
LOC:other What is the largest shopping mall in the world ? (mall)
HUM:ind What is the protagonist 's name in Dostoevski 's '' The Idiot '' ? (name)
ENTY:other What penalty space lies between Baltic Avenue and Reading Railroad on a Monopoly board ? (space)
HUM:ind What presidential press secretary dismissed Watergate as a third-rate burglary attempt ? (secretary)
DESC:def What is a meerkat ? (meerkat)
ENTY:animal What kind of animal was Winnie the Pooh ? (Winnie)
ENTY:word What 's the international radio code word for the letter B ? (word)
DESC:def What is cache memory ? (memory)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the midwest slang , ' you 're darn tootin ' ? (origin)
LOC:other What are the seven seas ? (seas)
ABBR:exp What does IBM stand for ? (IBM)
DESC:desc What is the difference between jazz and blues ? (difference)
DESC:def What is the C programming language ? (language)
HUM:ind What 's the name of Popeye 's adopted son ? (name)
DESC:def What is a ' borrow pit ' ? (pit)
HUM:ind What 2th-century fictional character attends Pencey Prep School ? (character)
ENTY:food What '' melts in your mouth , not in your hands '' . (What)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the atom ? (origin)
HUM:ind What two commanders directed the forces in the Battle of El Alamein ? (commanders)
DESC:def What is the meaning of the name Ella ? (meaning)
LOC:other What 's the home of the Rockettes ? (home)
HUM:gr What is the name of the firm that makes Spumante ? (name)
ENTY:sport What sport is played on the largest field ? (null)
ENTY:other What is after death ? (What)
HUM:ind What was football star Elroy Hirsch 's nickname ? (nickname)
HUM:ind What singer sings '' Oh Boy '' ? (singer)
LOC:other What is the website for the USA journal ? (website)
HUM:gr What army 's motto is Blood and Fire ? (Blood)
ENTY:other What kind of patent did Ermal Fraze get in 1963 ? (Fraze)
DESC:desc What are you hearing when you put a seashell to your ear ? (null)
LOC:state What U.S. state has the second-longest coastline ? (state)
LOC:state What state 's home to the Buffalo Bill Historical Center ? (null)
ENTY:other What is Ray Bradbury 's illustrated man illustrated with ? (man)
ENTY:other What kind of puzzle first appeared in the U.S. in the New York World on December 21 , 1913 ? (kind)
HUM:ind What count did Alexandre Dumas write about ? (Dumas)
NUM:perc What are the odds of giving birth to twins ? (odds)
LOC:other What is the largest natural lake in Pennsylvania ? (lake)
ENTY:animal What was the species of Winnie the Pooh ? (species)
DESC:def What is the virus HIV ? (HIV)
ENTY:cremat What Hermann Hesse book gave its name to a rock group ? (book)
ENTY:cremat What book is the follow-up to Future Shock ? (up)
ENTY:animal What African animals are known as The Big Five ? (null)
ENTY:letter What is the alphabet for Latin ? (alphabet)
ENTY:dismed What is the fear of frogs ? (fear)
ENTY:other What does a dipsomaniac crave ? (null)
DESC:def What is the definition of the term '' weapons system '' ? (definition)
DESC:desc What are Christopher Marlowe 's and Shakespeare 's literary contributions to English literature ? (contributions)
ENTY:food What is Nero Wolfe 's favorite drink during office hours ? (drink)
HUM:gr What is the first personal computer company ? (company)
ENTY:techmeth What is the most efficient way to start a barbeque ? (way)
ENTY:cremat What book did Aaron Hass write ? (Hass)
NUM:other What was the death toll at the eruption of Mount Pinatubo ? (toll)
DESC:def What is real time processing ? (processing)
LOC:other What do we call the imaginary line along the top of the Rocky Mountains ? (null)
LOC:country What country 's capital is Lagos ? (Lagos)
ENTY:symbol What was the distinguishing mark on the '' Little Rascals '' dog ? (mark)
NUM:other What is the latitude and longitude of El Paso , Texas ? (latitude)
DESC:def What is the theory of equivalence states ? (theory)
ENTY:other What does a philatelist collect ? (philatelist)
NUM:period What is the life span of the average monkey ? (span)
DESC:desc What will happen when sodium is put in water ? (What)
DESC:def What 's the meaning of UOL ? (meaning)
HUM:ind What future President became Senate majority whip under Harry Truman ? (whip)
NUM:dist What are the dimensions of an ice hockey goal ? (dimensions)
ENTY:symbol What are the signs of a country going into a recession ? (signs)
DESC:def What is the circumorbital hematoma ? (hematoma)
LOC:country What African country is governed from Ouagadougou ? (null)
HUM:ind What was the Christian name of the title character in Our Miss Brooks ? (name)
HUM:ind What hard-of hearing artist painted Sunflowers ? (artist)
ENTY:termeq What is the English translation for the word '' caliente '' ? (caliente)
ENTY:techmeth What handicraft requires you to interlace your warp and weft ? (handicraft)
LOC:city What French seaport claims to be The Home of Wines ? (Home)
HUM:ind What Cherokee Indian gave his name to a tree ? (Indian)
NUM:perc What is the chance of conceiving quadruplets ? (chance)
LOC:country What countries have the largest armed forces in the world ? (countries)
HUM:ind What was William F. Cody 's better-known name ? (name)
DESC:reason What are tonsils for ? (tonsils)
ENTY:substance What molecules include fluorine , sodium and magnesium ? (molecules)
ENTY:sport What was the name of the ball game played by the mayans ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What was the sequel to The Moon 's Balloon ? (sequel)
NUM:money What is the exchange rate for Australian to American money ? (rate)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word ' posh ' ? (origin)
ENTY:techmeth What basketball maneuver did Bert Loomis invent ? (Loomis)
ENTY:cremat What is a good book to read for people who hate to read ? (who)
ENTY:food What does a tarantula eat ? (null)
ENTY:color What are the three secondary colors ? (colors)
DESC:def What does the name '' Sabrina '' mean ? (Sabrina)
ENTY:event What were the trials called which followed World War II ? (trials)
DESC:def What is hebephrenia ? (What)
HUM:ind What Nazi leader killed himself in jail just before he was to be executed as a war criminal ? (leader)
ENTY:event What famous events have happened on March 27 ? (events)
NUM:other What brand number graces the black label of a bottle of Jack Daniel 's ? (number)
ENTY:termeq What do I call the sons and daughters of my first cousins ? (null)
DESC:reason What were the causes of the Civil War ? (causes)
DESC:def What are Maid-Rites ? (Rites)
LOC:city What city is terrorized by Dracula in The Night Stalker ? (null)
DESC:def What do the names Andrew and Christina mean ? (names)
ENTY:food What chocolate bar created by Frank Mars and his wife is often called a Milky Way with peanuts ? (null)
ENTY:other What do camels store in their humps ? (camels)
ENTY:veh What is the name of the second space shuttle ? (name)
LOC:other What is the best hospital for orthopedics in the country ? (hospital)
DESC:def What are perfect tenses ? (tenses)
DESC:def What is commonly considered the fifth sense ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What was another name for East Germany ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What 's the second-biggest-selling magazine in America ? (magazine)
DESC:def What is a bourdon tube ? (tube)
ENTY:sport What kind of a sports team is the Wisconsin Badgers ? (Badgers)
DESC:desc What do Caroll Baker , Tammy Grimes , Debbie Reynolds , and Judy Garland all have in common ? (Baker)
DESC:def What is film noir ? (noir)
DESC:reason What causes tuberculosis ? (What)
HUM:ind What actor dressed up as Santa Claus and had a once-a-year affair with actress Shelley Winters every Christmas for many years ? (null)
ENTY:animal What animal was the heat-seeking missile called the Sidewinder named for ? (missile)
LOC:other What lake is Sheboygan on ? (Sheboygan)
DESC:def What are a baseball team 's firemen ? (firemen)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of color ? (fear)
ENTY:veh What Nantucket shipwreck killed more divers exploring it than the 52 people it sank with ? (shipwreck)
ENTY:animal What are the two largest birds on earth ? (birds)
LOC:other What is the largest lake in North America ? (lake)
ENTY:dismed What is chronic constipation a symptom of ? (constipation)
HUM:ind What is the name of the American swimmer who won seven gold medals in the 1972 Olympics ? (who)
DESC:def What is Head Start ? (Start)
HUM:ind What Honeymooners actress did Television magazine name as 1953 's most promising star ? (actress)
ENTY:other What did the Yalta Conference lead to ? (Conference)
ENTY:animal What dog was dubbed The Mortgage Lifter ? (null)
DESC:def What is saltpeter ? (What)
DESC:desc What 's the difference between J.D. and LL.M. ? (difference)
HUM:gr What kind of organization is ' Last Chance for Animals ' ? (Chance)
HUM:ind What was the role of the Medieval Guild ? (role)
ENTY:other What should the oven be set at for baking Peachy Oat Muffins ? (null)
LOC:city What city or state do the most gay men live in ? (men)
ENTY:word What word occurs 46 , 227 times in the Bible ? (word)
NUM:date What year did Degas create the bronze sculpture , '' Fourth Position Front ? '' (Degas)
HUM:ind What composer was awarded the Medal of Honor by Franklin D. Roosevelt ? (null)
ABBR:exp What does U.S.S.R. stand for ? (U.S.S.R.)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of gravity ? (fear)
DESC:desc What did n't Rocky Marciano do in his pro boxing career ? (Marciano)
DESC:def What is the definition of ' graphic details ' ? (definition)
ENTY:product What was '' America 's recessed-filter cigarette '' ? (What)
ENTY:animal What kind of dog is Scooby Doo ? (Doo)
DESC:reason What is the function of the appendix ? (function)
HUM:ind What department store heir is responsible for raising a three-ton safe from the underwater wreckage of the Andrea Doria ? (heir)
LOC:city What was the first town to be chartered in Vermont ? (town)
LOC:state What state has the longest Great Lakes shoreline ? (state)
LOC:state What U.S. state ends with a G ? (state)
DESC:def What is a Cartesian Diver ? (Diver)
LOC:other What are the largest libraries in the US ? (libraries)
ENTY:cremat What document did President Andrew Johnson want a copy of placed under his head upon his burial ? (Johnson)
DESC:desc What happened in dogtown in 1899 to make that year remembered ? (What)
ENTY:other What wheel did Blaise Pascal invent in a search for perpetual motion ? (Pascal)
LOC:country What country boasts the most dams ? (country)
NUM:money What is the regular price ? (price)
LOC:other What Metropolis landmark was first introduced in the Superman cartoons of the 1940 's ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What Mary Tyler Moore Show regular came into the world as Tadeus Wladyslaw Konopka ? (Show)
DESC:def What is the largest variety of cactus ? (variety)
ENTY:cremat What did Aaron Hass write ? (Hass)
HUM:gr What was the business of the animated Sky Hawks ? (business)
ENTY:other What overalls are named for Dungri , a suburb of Bombay ? (null)
LOC:country What nationality was Jackson Pollock ? (Pollock)
ENTY:other What is the connection between New Krypton and Daxam ? (connection)
DESC:desc What must a Las Vegas blackjack dealer do when he reaches 16 ? (dealer)
LOC:other What is worth seeing in Reims ? (What)
ENTY:other What type of performer is Ileana Cotrubas ? (Cotrubas)
ENTY:food What line of candy products included Super Skrunch and Peanut Butter Oompas ? (line)
HUM:gr What organization has a Security Council ? (organization)
HUM:ind What Mexican leader was shot dead in 1923 ? (null)
ABBR:exp What does NECROSIS mean ? (NECROSIS)
DESC:def What is magnetar ? (What)
ENTY:event What feud ended with a marriage in Kentucky on March 21 , 1891 ? (feud)
ENTY:color What color is the stripe along each side of a Coho salmon ? (stripe)
NUM:money What is the federal minimum wage ? (wage)
NUM:other What are the unemployment statistics for the years 1965 and 1990 ? (statistics)
HUM:ind What female painter produced primitives of rural New England life ? (painter)
HUM:ind What are names of two old men who appear in the serial tv Muppets Show ? (who)
ENTY:event What war saw battles at Parrot 's Beak and Black Virgin ? (war)
DESC:desc What should you yell to hail a taxi in Madrid ? (null)
NUM:other What is the horsepower of the shuttle boosters ? (horsepower)
NUM:date What year did Apartheid start ? (Apartheid)
LOC:city What city is found in the city of OZ ? (null)
DESC:desc What ever happened to the once popular Yale Lock Company ? (What)
ENTY:other What did a 16th-century Aztec athlete get for putting a rubber ball through a ring ? (null)
LOC:state What populous state covers 49 , 576 square miles ? (state)
HUM:gr What college football team did Knute Rockne build into a power ? (Rockne)
LOC:country What country did the ancient Romans refer to as Hibernia ? (Romans)
ENTY:food What do chefs call The Master Spice ? (chefs)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviation of General Motors ? (abbreviation)
DESC:def What is a Devo hat ? (hat)
ENTY:other What kind of weapons were used in Medieval warfare ? (null)
HUM:ind What fruit-topped actress was known as The Brazilian Bombshell ? (null)
ENTY:animal What are birds descendents of ? (descendents)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of fur ? (fear)
ENTY:other What part of their attire were '' pothooks '' to cowboys of the Old West ? (pothooks)
DESC:def What is Toulmin logic ? (logic)
LOC:city What city in the U.S. experienced the most growth recently ? (city)
DESC:def What is a dangling participle ? (participle)
LOC:other What Tokyo street glitters with famed department stores and nightclubs ? (street)
NUM:period What was the average life expectancy during the Stone Age ? (expectancy)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the peace symbol ? (origin)
HUM:gr What group starred in the movie Rock Around the Clock ? (group)
HUM:ind What is Nathan Hamill 's role in the new Star Wars prequel ? (role)
NUM:perc What percentage of children between the ages of two and eleven watch ' The Simpsons ' ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What is the term for a group of geese ? (term)
ENTY:event What was the name of the famous battle between Texas and Mexico ? (name)
LOC:country What country are you in if you woo in the Wu dialect ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What do you call a Poker hand with five cards of the same suit ? (null)
HUM:ind What New York Yankee was known as The Iron Horse ? (null)
DESC:def What is moxie ? (moxie)
ENTY:cremat What was the first Sam Spade novel ? (novel)
ENTY:cremat What song did Patti Page set people dancing to in 1950 ? (Page)
LOC:city What South American city features the exclusive Copacabana Beach and Ipanema ? (city)
LOC:city What German city do Italians call The Monaco of Bavaria ? (Italians)
LOC:other What island group contains Jersey , Guernsey , Sark and Herm ? (group)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of strong light ? (fear)
HUM:ind What is a person called that likes fire ? (person)
ENTY:techmeth What is the best way to overcome a fear ? (way)
HUM:ind What French designer declared : '' The jean is the destructor ! It is a dictator ! It is destroying creativity. The jean must be stopped ! '' ? (dictator)
NUM:date What season is the setting for Shakespeare 's Midsummer Night 's Dream ? (setting)
HUM:ind What comedian was banned from the Ed Sullivan Show for allegedly making an obscene gesture at the show 's host ? (null)
LOC:country What country is the setting for Edgar Allan Poe 's The Pit and the Pendulum ? (setting)
HUM:ind What Apollo 11 astronaut minded the store while Armstrong and Aldrin made history ? (Armstrong)
NUM:money What is the current ticket fare from from Cairo to Barbados ? (fare)
LOC:mount What is the second highest mountain peak in the world ? (peak)
HUM:ind What Good Little Witch is Casper 's girlfriend ? (girlfriend)
HUM:ind What was the nickname of Frederick I , Holy Roman Emperor and King of Germany ? (nickname)
ENTY:event What war did the Potsdam Conference follow ? (Conference)
ENTY:dismed What 's the most common non-contagious disease in the world ? (disease)
NUM:date What month , date , and year did Charles I die ? (null)
DESC:def What is the hair style called that new military recruits receive ? (recruits)
LOC:other What 's the world 's largest cathedral ? (cathedral)
DESC:desc What effects do nitrates have on the environment ? (nitrates)
DESC:def What is Nitrox diving ? (diving)
LOC:country What three European countries begin with the letter A ? (countries)
DESC:desc What happened in the Long March ? (What)
ENTY:event What was the name of Hitler 's unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the Bavarian government in Munich in 1923 ? (name)
NUM:other What is the average hourly rate of American workers ? (rate)
ENTY:sport What sport features snatches and clean jerks ? (sport)
LOC:other What 's the world 's longest suspension bridge ? (bridge)
LOC:city What Asian city boasts the world 's biggest bowling alley ? (city)
HUM:ind What famous soldier was born in Europe , died in Asia , and was laid to rest in Africa ? (null)
HUM:gr What culture developed the idea of potlatch ? (culture)
HUM:gr What baseball team became the Minnesota Twins ? (Twins)
ENTY:instru What kind of guitar did Jimi Hendrix play ? (Hendrix)
LOC:city What were the first three cities to have a population of more than a million ? (cities)
LOC:other What constellation contains the twins Castor and Pollux ? (constellation)
DESC:def What is a gas release event ? (event)
ENTY:cremat What James Michener book is subtitled Spanish Travels and Reflections ? (null)
LOC:other What famed London criminal court was once a feudal castle ? (castle)
ENTY:other What stringed weapon fires a bolt ? (null)
HUM:ind What is Michael Jackson 's middle name ? (name)
DESC:def What does '' Semper Fidelis '' mean ? (Fidelis)
ENTY:product What kind of suit did true hepcats wear in 1942 ? (hepcats)
DESC:desc What were the three prophecies the witches make to Macbeth ? (witches)
NUM:other What 's the population of Mississippi ? (population)
ENTY:dismed What are all the different kinds of contraceptives ? (kinds)
DESC:desc What is the history of yo-yos ? (history)
HUM:gr What chocolate company gives you a one-pound kiss ? (company)
ENTY:other What fossilizes to form coprolite ? (What)
LOC:other What Caribbean island is sometimes called Little England ? (null)
ENTY:word What 's another word that means '' knows all '' ? (word)
LOC:city What Australian city became the home of the America 's Cup ? (home)
DESC:def What is pasta ? (pasta)
ENTY:color What color is '' ash '' ? (ash)
HUM:gr What is the best distance education university or college ? (university)
LOC:other What river does the Grand Coulee Dam dam ? (river)
ENTY:color What three colors are on the French flag ? (colors)
DESC:desc What 's the mystery of the Bermuda Triangle ? (mystery)
ENTY:other What are the seven wonders of the world ? (wonders)
ABBR:exp What does CNN stand for ? (CNN)
HUM:ind What is a person called that likes fire ? (person)
ENTY:other What constitutes an adult ? (What)
LOC:other What is a reliable site that I can download Heretic 2 ? (site)
DESC:def What is a neurosurgeon ? (neurosurgeon)
ENTY:sport What baseball outcome required nine balls in 1879 , eight balls in 1880 and seven balls in 1881 ? (outcome)
DESC:def What are amaretto biscuits ? (biscuits)
ENTY:dismed What common ailment can 't you catch at the North Pole ? (ailment)
NUM:date What season begins with the vernal equinox ? (season)
ENTY:animal What was the name of Roy Rogers 's dog ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What TV series changed the names to protect the innocent ? (series)
LOC:other What is George Lucas 's e-mail address ? (address)
DESC:desc What is the origin of '' jiggy '' as in getting jiggy with it ? (origin)
DESC:desc What is the origin of a.m. and p.m. ? (origin)
DESC:def What is the definition of cosmology ? (definition)
ENTY:animal What is the name of the dog on the Cracker Jack box ? (name)
DESC:def What are manifest and latent function theories ? (theories)
ENTY:cremat What William Styron book is about a black preacher who leads a slave revolt ? (who)
ENTY:symbol What is the chemical symbol for nitrogen ? (symbol)
HUM:gr What National League baseball team employed 72 third baseemen in its first 2 seasons ? (team)
DESC:def What are snowballs to a hot-rodder ? (snowballs)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word Ozymandias ? (origin)
LOC:city What Kenyan city is the safari center for East Africa ? (center)
DESC:reason What causes '' rolling thunder '' ? (null)
HUM:ind What is the name of Miss India 1994 ? (name)
LOC:state What four U.S. states have active volcanoes ? (states)
DESC:desc What 's the setting of John Le Carre 's A Small Town in Germany ? (setting)
DESC:desc What does an echidna look like ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the secret of the universe ? (secret)
HUM:ind What major Victorian novelist spent as much time working for the post office as he did writing ? (null)
DESC:reason What caused an adjournment of the 25th anniversary session of the United Nations General Assembly ? (What)
ENTY:termeq What is the name of the Islamic counterpart to the Red Cross ? (name)
NUM:date What year were the Olympic Games played in where Nadia Comaneci became popular ? (Comaneci)
ENTY:substance What is glass made of ? (glass)
LOC:other What are the biggest Indian airports ? (airports)
ENTY:cremat What is the folklore story regarding birds ' nests and birds in Christmas trees ? (story)
LOC:other What are the world 's three largest oceans , in order of size ? (oceans)
ENTY:termeq What do the French call La Manche ? (call)
ENTY:techmeth What 's an easy way to count the approximate number of fish in a lake ? (way)
ENTY:veh What was the name of Aristotle Onassis 's yacht ? (name)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of being dirty ? (fear)
ENTY:animal What animal occurs in Spielberg 's '' Jaws '' ? (animal)
DESC:def What 's the Red Planet ? (Planet)
HUM:ind What 's the most common surname in America ? (surname)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a fruit and a vegetable ? (difference)
ENTY:plant What kind of tree graces Lebanon 's flag ? (null)
DESC:def What is tumbled marble ? (null)
ENTY:techmeth What are the various ways in which one can measure IT User Satisfaction Level ? (one)
LOC:city What city is sometimes called The Athens of Switzerland ? (null)
DESC:def What are the Valdez Principles ? (Principles)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word assassinate ? (origin)
NUM:other What is the frequency of VHF ? (frequency)
DESC:desc What are the Arabic Numerals from 1 to 10 ? (Numerals)
ENTY:other What does the policeman become in the Canadian edition of Monopoly ? (policeman)
DESC:def What is digitalis ? (digitalis)
ENTY:plant What kind of flowers does detective Nero Wolfe raise ? (Wolfe)
ENTY:substance What was paper made of in the late 16th century ? (paper)
DESC:desc What was the outcome of the 1945 Yalta Conference ? (outcome)
DESC:def What is '' flintknapping '' ? (What)
ENTY:color What 's the most popular contact lens color ? (color)
LOC:city What were the cities of Dickens 's A Tale of Two Cities ? (cities)
DESC:reason What causes canker sores in the mouth ? (What)
ENTY:animal What is the fastest fish in the world ? (fish)
ENTY:color What color are the castellated walls of the Kremlin ? (walls)
ENTY:event What is celebrated during the week of February 21-27 ? (null)
ENTY:other What is damage to business and government caused by bureaucracy ? (damage)
LOC:country What countries have the best math students ? (countries)
ENTY:cremat What was a California prayer book to an Old West gambler ? (book)
ENTY:termeq What 's another name for aspartame ? (name)
DESC:desc What did John F. Kennedy consider his greatest blunder in office ? (Kennedy)
ABBR:abb What 's the abbreviation for trinitrotoluene ? (abbreviation)
ENTY:animal What creature is the absolute fastest in moving in the world , birds , mammals , etc. , ? (creature)
NUM:date What is the date of Bastille Day ? (date)
ABBR:exp What is IOC an abbreviation of ? (What)
DESC:reason What 's the proud claim to fame of the young women who formed Kappa Alpha Theta ? (who)
ENTY:color What color eyes are most sensitive to light ? (eyes)
HUM:gr What company uses the unfamiliar faces of its celebrity spokespeople to promote the use of its product ? (company)
ENTY:dismed What disease does Katharine Hepburn have that makes her voice shake ? (voice)
DESC:desc What did FCC chairman Newton Minow declare TV to be on May 9 , 1961 ? (Minow)
ENTY:termeq What is the name of the art of growing miniature trees ? (name)
LOC:country What two countries in South America are landlocked ? (countries)
DESC:def What does Tiffany mean ? (Tiffany)
DESC:def What is the meaning of thalassemia ? (meaning)
NUM:code What is Columbia Tristar 's phone number ? (number)
ENTY:techmeth What does the method called '' cold fusion '' create ? (method)
ENTY:other What determines the value of the pearl ? (What)
ENTY:veh What was the name of the American ship sunk by a mine in Havana harbor , causing the Spanish-American war ? (name)
ENTY:other What are emblazoned on the Jolly Roger ? (null)
DESC:def What are the alveoli ? (alveoli)
HUM:ind What comedian was born Allen Stewart Konigsberg ? (null)
LOC:state What state was Herbert Hoover born in ? (state)
ENTY:cremat What TV series featured Neal , a martini-drinking St. Bernard ? (series)
ENTY:other What developed a crack in 1835 while tolling the death of U.S. Chief Justice John Marshall ? (What)
HUM:ind What poet wrote : '' ... I have promises to keep , and miles to go before I sleep '' ? (poet)
DESC:def What is ethylene ? (ethylene)
ENTY:cremat What Irwin Allen bomb has Richard Widmark saying he 'll be '' the first officer in history to get his butt kicked by a mess of bugs ! '' ? (butt)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of clouds ? (fear)
ENTY:cremat What is the music used in the new VW Beetle commercial where the car spins and changes colors ? (car)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of pregnancy ? (fear)
NUM:count What is the population in India ? (population)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word '' pallbearer ? '' (origin)
LOC:state What state produces the best lobster to eat ? (state)
ENTY:sport What bowl game began as an East-West contest between Michigan and Stanford in 192 ? (game)
LOC:other What islands got their name from the Spanish baja mar , meaning shallow water ? (islands)
DESC:def What is deadrise , nautical , ? (deadrise)
ENTY:lang What 's the official language of Algeria ? (language)
ENTY:other What took first prize in Omni magazine 's contest to find the '' ultimate unanswerable question '' ? (What)
ENTY:word What six words follow the line : '' From a jack to a king.. . '' ? (words)
HUM:ind What author of the Days of Our Lives Cookbook signed on in 198 as Liz Chandler in TV 's Days of Our Lives ? (author)
ENTY:food What foods contain the most protein ? (foods)
HUM:ind What President was assassinated by Charles J. Guiteau ? (null)
HUM:ind What comic of TV 's golden age went by the motto '' Anything for a laugh '' ? (comic)
LOC:country What was the nationality of Jackson Pollock ? (nationality)
ENTY:animal What are the snakes of New England ? (snakes)
LOC:country What is the name of the country which Hitler ruled ? (Hitler)
HUM:gr What group kidnaped Patricia Hearst ? (group)
DESC:desc What do you do when your mouse is n't working as fast as it 's supposed to ? (mouse)
DESC:def What is a gandy dancer ? (dancer)
ENTY:animal What Triple Crown-winning horse took the 1973 Belmont Stakes by 31 lengths ? (horse)
NUM:other What 's a perfect score in a gymnastics exercise ? (score)
ENTY:termeq What is the dot on an the letter i called ? (dot)
LOC:city What 's the capital of Iowa ? (capital)
DESC:def What 's the rathaus in Frankfurt ? (rathaus)
HUM:ind What President served for five years , six months and 2 days ? (President)
ENTY:termeq What do you call the feeling of having experienced something before ? (null)
DESC:reason What incident caused the canning of a summit conference between Eisenhower and Khrushchev ? (incident)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviated form of the National Bureau of Investigation ? (form)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of odors , body , ? (fear)
ENTY:techmeth What is the formula to calculate pi ? (formula)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a bachelor and a 1 bedroom apartment ? (difference)
HUM:ind What is Drew Barrymore 's middle name ? (name)
DESC:def What are Cobol , Fortran , and Pascal ? (Cobol)
HUM:ind What is Supergirl 's secret identity ? (identity)
LOC:other What is the US Federal Government website for Standard Industrial Classification codes , SIC , ? (website)
HUM:gr What court does Bob Woodward describe in The Brethren ? (Woodward)
HUM:ind What is the name of the police officer who tried to keep order in Top Cat 's neighborhood ? (who)
NUM:perc What are the highest-paying odds on a roulette table ? (odds)
ENTY:other What does a deltiologist collect ? (deltiologist)
DESC:reason What is Garry Kasparov famous for ? (Kasparov)
ABBR:exp What does the '' c '' stand for in the equation E=mc2 ? (c)
HUM:ind What well-known music personality is the father of an adopted son named Hans Christian Henderson ? (father)
ENTY:substance What 's the hardest substance in the human body ? (substance)
HUM:ind What Green Bay Packers coach philosophized : '' There 's nothing that stokes the fire like hate '' ? (nothing)
ENTY:termeq What 's the International Lawn Tennis Challenge Trophy usually called ? (Trophy)
NUM:date What year did nylon stockings first go on sale ? (stockings)
ENTY:sport What is a research expedition in mountain climbing ? (expedition)
LOC:city What are the 10 largest cities in the US ? (cities)
DESC:def What is a wart ? (What)
DESC:def What is spaceball played on ? (null)
HUM:ind What famous comedian recently tried without success to revive the play ? (comedian)
LOC:other What is Drew Barrymore 's email address ? (address)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a preface and a foreword ? (difference)
ENTY:substance What are fingernails made of ? (fingernails)
LOC:country What nationality were the 123 people who died in the Black Hole of Calcutta ? (who)
DESC:def What does storm wave mean in Japanese ? (null)
HUM:ind What TV family sometimes buys eclairs from Nelson 's Bakery ? (family)
HUM:ind What enigmatic U.S. vice president was once tried and acquitted for treason in a plot to set up his own independent empire in the West ? (null)
ENTY:other What is the one thing you need before you can purchase life insurance ? (thing)
DESC:reason What caused the Titanic to sink ? (Titanic)
DESC:def What is the chemiosmotic theory ? (theory)
HUM:desc What information can you tell me about actor James Cromwell ? (null)
NUM:date What was the date of Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait ? (date)
ENTY:word What is another word for diet ? (word)
DESC:def What is a courier ? (courier)
ENTY:cremat What Sinatra hit did he dooby dooby do in ? (Sinatra)
ENTY:other What award is the '' Oscar '' of advertising ? (Oscar)
LOC:other What is the name of the planet that the Ewoks live on ? (Ewoks)
ENTY:food What ice creams contain seaweed ? (creams)
HUM:ind What dumb-but-loveable character did Maurice Gosfield play on The Phil Silvers Show ? (Gosfield)
ABBR:exp What is a '' USB '' port on a computer ? (port)
ENTY:termeq What term means a sexual attraction between a male and a female ? (term)
HUM:gr What was called the world 's largest department store ? (null)
LOC:other What sea surrounds the Cayman Islands ? (sea)
ABBR:exp What does LOL mean ? (LOL)
LOC:other What ocean was Amelia Earhart flying over when she disappeared ? (Earhart)
ENTY:cremat What book does Holden Caulfield appear in ? (Caulfield)
DESC:desc What happens when lightning strikes a body of water ? (lightning)
HUM:ind What was the nickname of German flying ace Manfred von Richthofen ? (nickname)
DESC:def What does e=mc2 mean ? (null)
LOC:country What country other than Germany invaded Poland in September 1939 ? (country)
ENTY:body What are the names of the different toes ? (names)
ENTY:product What are different products of petroleum ? (products)
DESC:reason What causes asthma ? (What)
DESC:def What do the number 1 , 2 , and 4 mean on Dr. Pepper bottles ? (number)
LOC:state What is the largest U.S. state east of the Mississippi ? (east)
NUM:other What 's the population of Biloxi , Mississippi ? (population)
ENTY:letter What vowel do all Esperanto nouns end in ? (nouns)
DESC:def What is a heuristic ? (heuristic)
LOC:other What California desert is dubbed High Desert ? (null)
LOC:country What African country was founded by freed American slaves in 1847 ? (null)
NUM:date What year did the first issue of '' Playboy '' come out ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of motion ? (fear)
HUM:ind What pseudonym did William Sydney Porter use in writing The Gift of the Magi ? (Porter)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of glass ? (fear)
HUM:ind What is the last name of Lucy and Linus from the Peanut 's comic strip ? (name)
HUM:ind What cheery fellow got the ZIP code 9971 from the U.S. Postal Service in 1963 ? (fellow)
LOC:other What 's the nearest star to Earth ? (star)
ENTY:termeq What does El Nino mean in spanish ? (Nino)
DESC:desc What does Choo Choo Charlie say ? (Charlie)
NUM:count What was the number of assassinations and attempts to assassinate in the U.S. since 1865 ? (number)
DESC:def What is a Jake brake ? (brake)
ENTY:symbol What sign is the best love match for a horoscope sign ? (match)
ENTY:other What cards are bullets ? (bullets)
NUM:period What is the average age a horse lives ? (horse)
LOC:other What planet would you visit to see Bebrenia , Arcadia , and Amazonis ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What J.R.R. Tolkien book features Gimli as a central character ? (book)
ENTY:product What brand of white rum is still made in Cuba ? (null)
HUM:gr What business exports the sparkling wine Spumante ? (business)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of water ? (fear)
DESC:def What does the number 33 on the Rolling Rock beer bottle mean ? (number)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the city '' Corpus Christi '' ? (origin)
HUM:gr What was the first U.S.-based team in the NHL ? (team)
ENTY:other What did Walter Huston remove to perform in the movie The Treasure of the Sierra Madre ? (Huston)
ENTY:animal What animals acted as lapwarmers for American colonists in church ? (animals)
LOC:country What country , after Canada and Mexico , is closest to the U.S. ? (country)
ENTY:body What is the weakest bone in the body ? (bone)
DESC:def What is dew point ? (point)
HUM:ind What was the name of Darth Vader 's son ? (name)
LOC:country What country has been called The Queen of the Antilles ? (null)
NUM:other What is the population of Mozambique ? (population)
DESC:def What is multimedia ? (What)
LOC:state What state has the most Indians ? (state)
DESC:desc What is the difference between terry cloth and French terry ? (difference)
DESC:def What are '' inkhorn terms '' ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the difference between pop music and rock and roll ? (difference)
LOC:other What river is Pocahontas buried along ? (null)
DESC:def What does hazmat stand for ? (null)
DESC:def What is '' bloodhound '' ? (bloodhound)
ENTY:animal What was Paul Bunyan 's ox 's name ? (name)
ENTY:other What trophy is awarded to the winners of the Super Bowl ? (null)
HUM:ind What well-known TV talk show host was a lay preacher by the time he was seventeen ? (preacher)
DESC:desc What are the environmental influences on plant genetics ? (influences)
HUM:ind What one of the Backstreet Boys are single ? (null)
LOC:other What river flows through Vienna , Budapest and Belgrade ? (river)
HUM:ind What Civil War general wreaked havoc on the south by marching through Georgia on his way to the sea ? (null)
DESC:def What is carpal tunnel syndrome ? (syndrome)
ABBR:exp What does IOC stand for ? (IOC)
ENTY:symbol What is the trademark of a Washington Redskin 's fan ? (trademark)
HUM:ind What suburban housewife and mother of three wrote The Feminine Mystique ? (housewife)
LOC:city What is the largest city in the world ? (city)
ENTY:sport What famed tennis tournament 's men 's singles title was Fred Perry the last Englishman to win ? (Perry)
NUM:weight What is the average weight for a man ? (weight)
LOC:other What are Britain 's two longest rivers ? (rivers)
LOC:country What country covers 8 , 600 , 387 square miles ? (country)
ENTY:substance What fuel do airplanes use ? (airplanes)
DESC:def What does palindromic mean ? (null)
DESC:desc What baseball expression came from the nautical term for ships sailing between the Atlantic and Pacific before the Panama Canal ? (expression)
LOC:other What is the oldest ethnological museum in the world ? (museum)
ENTY:color What color flies closest to the staff on Belgium 's flag ? (color)
ENTY:other What is the smallest thing seen under the most powerful microscope , and how big is it ? (thing)
ENTY:letter What letter appears on the cold-water tap in Spain ? (letter)
ENTY:substance What is a camel hair brush actually made out of ? (brush)
DESC:def What is the Socratic method ? (method)
LOC:other What island has a park called The Battery at is southern tip ? (tip)
DESC:def What is hypertext ? (What)
DESC:desc What do I need to learn to design web pages ? (null)
NUM:date What was the date of CNN 's first broadcast ? (date)
ENTY:cremat What Peter Blatty novel recounts the horrors of Regan MacNeil 's possession by the devil ? (novel)
NUM:other What is the all-time stock high of Apple Computer , and where can I find this information ? (high)
ENTY:food What non-alcoholic syrup is made from pomegranate juice ? (null)
ENTY:other What meter was invented by C.C. Magee in 1935 ? (null)
LOC:other What Caribbean island is northeast of Trinidad ? (island)
ENTY:cremat What Michelangelo sculpture is in Saint Peter 's Cathedral , Basilica , ? (sculpture)
DESC:desc What 's the difference and advantages of selecting a Super VHS VCR over plain VHS model ? (difference)
NUM:date What is Dick Clark 's birthday ? (birthday)
ENTY:termeq What is the name for clouds that produce rain ? (name)
NUM:date What day of the week was July 13 ? (July)
ENTY:dismed What does Salk vaccine prevent ? (vaccine)
HUM:ind What U.S. general was court-martialled for criticizing American air power ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of insanity ? (fear)
ENTY:instru What do West Indian steel bands use as instruments ? (bands)
LOC:state What is the fastest growing state in the U.S.A. in 1998 ? (state)
ENTY:event What was the name of the U.S. 's first manned space program ? (name)
ENTY:other What were the achievements of Richard Nixon ? (achievements)
NUM:date What year was the NAACP founded ? (NAACP)
HUM:ind What jockey won 17 Triple Crown races ? (jockey)
LOC:state What U.S. state 's biggest lake is Lake Sam Rayburn ? (Rayburn)
DESC:def What is Greek pita ? (pita)
ENTY:animal What do peacocks mate with ? (peacocks)
LOC:state What state is Niagara Falls located in ? (Falls)
ENTY:other What tools do you use to crewel ? (null)
DESC:def What is narcolepsy ? (What)
ENTY:event What is the name of the American literary era that includes 1896 ? (name)
ENTY:termeq What 's the term for an organism that lives on or in another ? (term)
LOC:city What Scandinavian capital is built on nine bridge-connected islands ? (null)
HUM:ind What well-known actor is the father of star Alan Alda ? (father)
DESC:def What does the name ' Alexandra ' mean ? (Alexandra)
NUM:volsize What is the size of Argentina ? (size)
ENTY:substance What would you add to the clay mixture to produce bone china ? (null)
DESC:def What is leukemia ? (leukemia)
ENTY:cremat What Stephen Sondheim ballad ends : '' Well , maybe next year.. . '' ? (ballad)
NUM:date What date is Richard Nixon 's birthday ? (birthday)
ENTY:animal What film canine is buried in Pere-Lachaise cemetery in Paris ? (null)
HUM:ind What little boy and dog live in a shoe ? (boy)
NUM:perc What percent of world 's fresh water is found in Canada ? (null)
HUM:ind What was Marilyn Monroe 's real name ? (name)
NUM:other What number of American soldiers remain unaccounted from the Vietnam war ? (number)
ABBR:abb What is the acronym for the National Bureau of Investigation ? (acronym)
HUM:ind What father and son won the Medal of Honor ? (father)
ENTY:cremat What is the name of a Salt Lake City newspaper ? (name)
NUM:date What year did Spielberg make '' Jaws '' ? (Spielberg)
DESC:def What 's the meaning of the zoological term ruminant ? (meaning)
HUM:ind What is the name of the woman who was with John Belushi when he died ? (who)
DESC:def What is hyperopia ? (What)
ENTY:color What color Poker chip is usually assigned the lowest value ? (chip)
LOC:other What do most tourists visit in Reims ? (tourists)
LOC:city What United States city produces the most oil ? (city)
ENTY:termeq What 's the name of the Tokyo Stock Exchange ? (name)
NUM:perc What 's the percentage of children aged two through eleven who watch ' 'The Simpsons ' ? (who)
ENTY:cremat What TV show premiered on January 15 , 1981 ? (show)
LOC:country What was the only country in the Western Hemisphere to join the Russian-led boycott of the 1984 Summer Olympics ? (country)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviated term used for the National Bureau of Investigation ? (term)
DESC:def What is e-commerce ? (commerce)
HUM:ind What 's the better-known identity of John Merrick , the noble ogre of Victorian England ? (identity)
HUM:ind What is her husband 's name ? (name)
HUM:gr What cigarette company urged us , '' Come to where the flavor is ? '' (flavor)
HUM:ind What Dynasty star made her 2th Century-Fox debut in The Virgin Queen ? (star)
HUM:ind What actress holds the record for the most appearances on the cover of Life ? (actress)
ENTY:other What was the first TV set to include a remote control ? (set)
ENTY:product What first-aid product '' Helps the hurt stop hurting '' ? (product)
DESC:desc What was the verdict in the trial of Lizzie Borden ? (verdict)
HUM:ind What U.S. President had brothers-in-law in the Confederate army ? (President)
DESC:def What does the Greek word polis mean , as in Minneapolis ? (polis)
HUM:ind What actor learned to play the saxophone and speak Russian for a role in a movie ? (actor)
DESC:def What is the literal meaning of '' D-DAY '' ? (meaning)
LOC:state What state was named the Green Mountain state ? (null)
ENTY:body What carries sperm up into the pelvic region ? (What)
NUM:date What year was the ATM first introduced ? (ATM)
LOC:state What are all the southern states of the United States ? (states)
NUM:other What does 7847+5943 equal ? (What)
ENTY:cremat What book is subtitled The Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life ? (null)
HUM:ind What attorneys work for The Center for the Defense of Free Enterprise ? (attorneys)
NUM:date What is Dick Clark 's date of birth ? (date)
DESC:def What does the name '' Sheri '' mean ? (name)
ENTY:animal What is the only primate to lack pigment in the palms of its hands ? (primate)
LOC:other What constellation is known as The Water Bearer ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What tale has the moral : '' He who wants everything gets nothing '' ? (everything)
HUM:gr What U.S. university boasts the largest library ? (university)
DESC:desc What do Japanese school uniforms look like ? (uniforms)
LOC:state What state is Mount McKinley in ? (McKinley)
DESC:def What is swap math ? (null)
DESC:def What is hypnotherapy ? (hypnotherapy)
ABBR:exp What is RCD ? (RCD)
DESC:def What is the biblical meaning of ' stones ' ? (meaning)
HUM:gr What company markets a shampoo '' for brunettes only '' ? (company)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of touching ? (fear)
ENTY:event What is the name of the largest water conservancy project in China ? (name)
DESC:desc What are the words to the song sung by '' Banana in Pajamas '' ? (words)
DESC:desc What is the root of all evil ? (root)
ENTY:animal What animal has the best hearing ? (animal)
NUM:date What time does Wee Willie Winkie run through the town ? (Winkie)
NUM:ord What chapter of Gone with the Wind has Rhett Butler leaving Scarlett O 'Hara ? (Butler)
NUM:money What amount of money did the Philippine ex-dictator Marcos steal from the treasury ? (dictator)
ENTY:cremat What film featured Shirley MacLaine as a prostitute and Jack Lemmon as a pimp ? (film)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of drinking ? (fear)
LOC:country What Asian country once thrilled to the sport of cricket fighting ? (country)
ENTY:cremat What Ernest Hemingway novel had the working title Fiesta ? (novel)
ENTY:color What color of Monopoly properties are landed on most often ? (null)
NUM:period What is the average life expectancy of a male in Ireland in 1996 ? (expectancy)
DESC:def What is '' Vocal Sampling '' ? (What)
ENTY:veh What ocean liner burned and sank in Hong Kong harbor ? (liner)
LOC:city What city is near the mouth of the Amazon ? (city)
HUM:ind What U.S. vice-president once declared : '' If you 've seen one slum , you 've seen them all '' ? (president)
ENTY:currency What money was used by them ? (null)
ENTY:color What color , s , appear on boxes of Kodak film ? (color)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word trigonometry ? (origin)
DESC:desc What is Compaq 's mission statement ? (statement)
ENTY:other What was the name of the 1899 policy forced on China by which all nations had equal trading rights ? (nations)
HUM:ind What British monarch 's lap did P.T. Barnum 's Tom Thumb sit in ? (Thumb)
HUM:gr What is the name of Joan Jett 's band ? (name)
ENTY:other What does Visine get out ? (Visine)
HUM:gr What civilization invented the arch ? (civilization)
DESC:desc What are some fun things to do in Cozumel , Mexico for teenagers ? (things)
HUM:gr What is an example of a famous rock band from the sixties ? (example)
LOC:other What former royal palace has served as a granary , prison , arsenal , leper colony , mint , telegraph station and whorehouse before becoming an art museum ? (museum)
HUM:ind What president 's ghost is said to haunt the White House ? (null)
HUM:ind What are the names of Jack 's original roommates on Three 's Company ? (names)
DESC:def What is the definition of hazmat ? (definition)
ENTY:food What do you get by mixing gin and vermouth ? (null)
LOC:city What is the snowiest city in the U.S. ? (city)
DESC:def What is crabgrass ? (crabgrass)
ENTY:cremat What book opens : '' At a certain village in La Mancha , which I shall not name.. . '' ? (book)
ABBR:exp What does SHIELD stand for ? (SHIELD)
DESC:def What is The Gay Science ? (Science)
NUM:other What is the chemical reactivity of helium ? (reactivity)
DESC:reason What is main reason for that electric vehicles can 't be popular nowadays ? (t)
DESC:desc What is the difference between optical and digital video ? (difference)
DESC:desc What clause in the U.S. Constitution may not be changed , altered or amended ? (null)
DESC:desc What 's new in the postal world in 1999 ? (What)
HUM:ind What actor came to dinner in Guess Who 's Coming to Dinner ? (Who)
DESC:desc What is the difference between the anus and the rectum ? (difference)
DESC:def What is a Guild ? (Guild)
DESC:desc What is the difference between college and graduate school ? (difference)
DESC:desc What is Franz Kafka 's short story '' A Country Doctor '' trying to tell us ? (story)
HUM:ind What engineer invented the pull-tab can ? (engineer)
LOC:city What South American capital is the world 's highest ? (world)
DESC:desc What are the lyrics to the Star Spangled Banner ? (lyrics)
DESC:desc What will a compass do in outer space ? (compass)
ENTY:cremat What Aesop 's fable has the moral : '' The race is not always to the swift. Slow and steady is bound to win '' ? (race)
LOC:other What famed strip of land is a 15-minute boat trip across the Venetian Lagoon from Venice ? (trip)
DESC:def What is a hydrogen bond ? (bond)
NUM:money What is the exchange rate between England and the U.S. ? (rate)
ENTY:other What does a woman want ? (woman)
NUM:other What is the protection rate of using condoms ? (rate)
ABBR:abb What 's the abbreviation for limited partnership ? (abbreviation)
ENTY:cremat What Russian novel embracing more the 5 characters is set in the Napoleonic Wars ? (null)
ENTY:color What is your favorite color ? (color)
ENTY:other What is the longest chemical name , consisting of 35 letters ? (name)
HUM:ind What bottled-up TV character was born in Baghdad ? (null)
DESC:def What is a multiplexer ? (multiplexer)
ENTY:other What credit card features a centurion on its face ? (card)
LOC:mount What are the four largest mountain ranges on the Asian continent ? (ranges)
DESC:def What are the Poconos ? (Poconos)
DESC:def What does caliente mean , in English ? (null)
DESC:reason What is Jane Goodall famous for ? (Goodall)
ENTY:event What is the mission of Nike ? (mission)
DESC:def What is thalassemia ? (thalassemia)
ENTY:veh What nuclear-powered Russian submarine sank in the Norwegian Sea on April 7 , 1989 ? (submarine)
LOC:country What country boasts the southernmost point in continental Europe ? (country)
DESC:desc What is so powerful about Power Bars ? (What)
ENTY:termeq What do the Japanese call Japan ? (null)
LOC:country What country was Brian Boru an 11th-century king of ? (Boru)
DESC:desc What happens when a body part falls asleep ? (part)
ENTY:word What English word has the most letters ? (word)
ENTY:cremat What film ends with the line : '' This is Mrs. Norman Maine '' ? (Maine)
DESC:def What is June 's birthstone ? (birthstone)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the proverb '' A stitch in time saves nine '' ? (origin)
LOC:city What state capital comes last alphabetically ? (capital)
ENTY:food What 's the main vegetable in vichyssoise ? (vegetable)
ENTY:food What beer tells us , '' Grab all the gusto you can get . '' ? (beer)
LOC:other What is the geographical center of the US including Alaska and Hawaii ? (center)
DESC:def What is diabetes ? (diabetes)
ENTY:event What phenomenon would you expect to read about in the monthly publication The Bigfoot News ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of punishment ? (fear)
NUM:money What is average salary of restaurant manager in United States ? (salary)
ENTY:cremat What comic strip sometimes features a mailman named Beasley ? (strip)
ENTY:other What device provided a new way to listen to music in 1963 ? (device)
ENTY:food What will a kid eat the middle of , and save the chocolate on the outside for last ? (kid)
ABBR:exp What does the abbreviation IOC stand for ? (null)
DESC:def What 's a short ton ? (ton)
ENTY:body What two body parts grow all your life ? (parts)
HUM:ind What Texas surgeon performed the first artificial heart transplant ? (surgeon)
LOC:country What country has the port of Haifa ? (country)
ENTY:substance What is the main ingredient of yogurt ? (ingredient)
ENTY:food What is the recipe for Eggs Benedict ? (recipe)
LOC:other What is the address for the main government office in Rome , Italy ? (address)
ENTY:food What 's the largest U.S. agricultural crop by weight ? (crop)
ENTY:other What is the electronic device used to produce visual displays corresponding to electric signals ? (device)
DESC:def What is goldenseal ? (What)
DESC:def What is the Lost Colony ? (Colony)
ENTY:substance What is the chemical composition of a Barbie ? (composition)
HUM:gr What store claims to be the world 's largest department store ? (store)
ENTY:termeq What is the lens behind the iris in the eye called ? (lens)
DESC:def What is Tetrinet ? (Tetrinet)
HUM:ind What '' marvelous '' major-league baseball player is now a spokesman for a beer company ? (spokesman)
ENTY:word What is the longest English word that can be formed using just the first row of letters on a typewriter ? (word)
ENTY:termeq What is Chiricahua the name of ? (Chiricahua)
ENTY:termeq What 's the green variety of beryl called ? (variety)
ENTY:veh What was the name of Captain Bligh 's ship ? (name)
NUM:period What age is Benny Carter ? (Carter)
LOC:city What city did the Mormons establish as their headquarters in 1847 ? (Mormons)
DESC:def What is amezaiku ? (What)
LOC:country What two countries are linked by the Brenner Pass ? (null)
ENTY:sport What new games are available for Nintendo 64 ? (games)
ENTY:color What is the predominant color of the Tab label ? (color)
LOC:city What U.S. city was named for St. Francis of Assisi ? (null)
DESC:def What is the definition of '' chancery '' file in real estate ? (chancery)
NUM:date What day is known as the '' national day of prayer '' ? (null)
HUM:ind What TV character said ; '' One of these days , Alice , pow , right in the kisser '' ? (character)
HUM:ind What is the name of the Indian who became prime minister by beating Mrs. Gandhi in the 1977 election ? (minister)
ENTY:word What are the conjugations of wake and woke ? (conjugations)
HUM:ind What Chilean president was killed in a 1973 coup d 'etat ? (null)
NUM:other What was Einstein 's IQ ? (IQ)
ENTY:termeq What are John C. Calhoun and Henry Clay known as ? (Calhoun)
HUM:ind What are the first names of the famous husband-and-wife acting team of Lunt and Fontanne ? (names)
ENTY:sport What are some good exercises for kids to do ? (kids)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviation of the National Bureau of Investigation ? (abbreviation)
LOC:other What is the principal river of Ireland ? (river)
LOC:other What lake is the source of the White Nile ? (source)
DESC:def What is Zionism ? (Zionism)
HUM:gr What cable network bills itself as '' the family entertainer '' ? (null)
DESC:desc What have you not let a tennis ball do if you volley ? (ball)
ENTY:product What product is for kids , and not for silly rabbits ? (product)
DESC:def What else has the swastika stood for ? (swastika)
ENTY:other What are the 7 Wonders of the World ? (Wonders)
DESC:def What is meant by the term '' yield to maturity '' in reference to bonds ? (null)
ENTY:food What became the biggest cash crop in the U.S. in 1983 , surpassing corn ? (crop)
HUM:ind What President was meant for , but never placed in , the empty crypt beneath the capital 's rotunda ? (null)
ENTY:other What is the biggest '' thing '' humans have made ? (humans)
LOC:other What are all the rivers in Europe ? (rivers)
ENTY:other What five cards make up a perfect Cribbage hand ? (cards)
NUM:period What is the time it takes a typist to type a screenplay that is 100 pages long ? (time)
ENTY:animal What is the full classification of a lady bug ? (classification)
HUM:ind What Hungarian cardinal was first a state prisoner and then a refugee in the U.S. embassy 1956-1971 ? (prisoner)
ENTY:other What was the name of the peace agreement imposed on Germany after World War I ? (name)
LOC:country What 's the fifth-largest country in the world ? (country)
ENTY:cremat What newspaper serves Salt Lake City ? (newspaper)
ENTY:food What spice do chefs pay the most for ? (chefs)
DESC:def What is troilism ? (troilism)
ENTY:veh What was the sister ship of the Olympic ? (ship)
HUM:ind What is the nickname of the famous flyer who mistakenly flew to Ireland instead of to Los Angeles ? (who)
ABBR:exp What is HTML ? (HTML)
HUM:gr What high school does Archie attend ? (Archie)
ENTY:animal What animal migrates the farthest ? (animal)
ENTY:cremat What film was based on the play Everybody Comes to Rick 's ? (Everybody)
HUM:gr What television network flogged its sports programming on Inga Nielsen 's body in 197 ? (network)
ENTY:cremat What 's the sequel to Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland ? (sequel)
LOC:city What is the capital of Seattle ? (capital)
HUM:ind What Italian leader had a lifelong fear of the evil eye ? (leader)
LOC:city What city in Florida is Sea World in ? (World)
DESC:def What 's a water funnel ? (funnel)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of worms ? (fear)
DESC:def What is a Chinese '' spouting '' bowl ? (Chinese)
DESC:desc What does an emperor do ? (emperor)
HUM:ind What president kissed the Queen Mother on the lips ? (president)
LOC:other What continent pushes up the Executive Committee mountain range ? (continent)
DESC:reason What was Al Capone finally imprisoned for , in 1931 ? (Capone)
ENTY:food What food can I use to catch a possum ? (null)
HUM:ind What was Al Capone 's nickname ? (nickname)
LOC:city What is the largest city in Germany ? (city)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of cholera ? (fear)
LOC:other What park contains Firehole River and Fairy Falls ? (park)
LOC:other What 's the largest island in the West Indies ? (island)
LOC:state What New England state carries the telephone area code 27 ? (state)
ENTY:other What is an example of a natural acid-base indicator ? (example)
DESC:desc What is the song Stairway to Heaven by Led Zeppelin about ? (song)
ENTY:other What are pushed and coupled in hump yards ? (null)
LOC:city What city hosted the first Winter Olympics in Asia ? (city)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the first name ' Breony ' ? (origin)
NUM:date What month were you born in if your birthstone is sardonyx ? (birthstone)
DESC:desc What is the origin of '' Beauty is in the eye of the beholder '' ? (Beauty)
ENTY:food What soft drink not only has its own video game , but was featured in its own Marvel comic book ? (drink)
ENTY:cremat What oldtime kids ' fare did TV Guide writer Jeff Greenfield call '' one of the most...subversive TV shows in American history '' ? (Greenfield)
ABBR:exp What does A&W of root beer fame stand for ? (A&W)
ENTY:termeq What tennis term is said to come from the French word for egg ? (null)
ENTY:other What does a collier mine ? (null)
LOC:country What desert country borders Saudi Arabia , Iraq and the Persian Gulf ? (desert)
ENTY:event What are the ages in comic book lingo ? (ages)
ENTY:animal What kinds of animals are in Cambodia ? (kinds)
HUM:gr What South African producer had a 1988 profit of $836 million ? (producer)
HUM:ind What American actress was the first to be called a '' vamp '' ? (actress)
DESC:def What do the 12 days of Christmas mean ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What John Steinbeck novel portrays the Joad family , driven from the Oklahoma dustbowl ? (novel)
NUM:date What date did man first land on the moon ? (null)
DESC:desc What 's the last line of Dickens 's A Christmas Carol ? (line)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a bottle and a jar ? (difference)
ENTY:dismed What disease is the second-biggest killer of North Americans ? (killer)
DESC:desc What happens to the female body with lack of sleep and food ? (What)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of crystals or glass ? (fear)
ENTY:animal What common livestock have the greatest variety of breeds ? (livestock)
ENTY:cremat What film had Bette Davis creating a scandal by wearing a daring red gown to a society ball ? (Davis)
ENTY:dismed What disease did August von Wassermann develop a specific test for in 196 ? (Wassermann)
HUM:gr What card company sells Christmas ornaments ? (company)
ENTY:other What can communications satellites offer yachts ? (satellites)
HUM:ind What cigar-chewing comedian observed : '' You 're only as old as the woman you feel '' ? (comedian)
HUM:gr What bread company used to feature stickers of the Cisco Kid on the ends of their packages ? (company)
DESC:def What is hydrogen ? (hydrogen)
HUM:gr What group asked the musical question Do You Believe in Magic ? (group)
LOC:other What was the tallest building in America in 1922 ? (building)
HUM:ind What buxom blonde appeared on the cover of more than 5 magazines ? (blonde)
DESC:def What is recruitment interview technique ? (technique)
DESC:def What does the donation process entail ? (process)
LOC:city What New Hampshire hamlet rises early to vote first in U.S. presidential elections ? (hamlet)
ENTY:product What garment was named for Bradley , Voorhees and Day ? (null)
ENTY:other What 's destroyed in Genesis 19 : 24 ? (null)
ENTY:event What new year is celebrated on February 16th ? (null)
DESC:def What is Occam 's Razor ? (Razor)
HUM:ind What role do fruits play in the survival of plants ? (fruits)
DESC:reason What are the medical purposes of '' clitoridectomy '' ? (purposes)
ENTY:cremat What 's the name of the Tampa newspaper ? (name)
DESC:def What is a storm surge ? (surge)
ENTY:other What was the alternate to VHS ? (What)
ENTY:lang What is one of the languages of the Sioux ? (What)
HUM:ind What Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist ran for mayor of New York City ? (novelist)
ENTY:food What was the food of the Greek gods called ? (food)
DESC:def What does camera-ready art mean ? (art)
DESC:desc What happened to Phillip Taylor Kramer ? (What)
ENTY:cremat What Erica Jong novel deals with Isadora Wing 's fear ? (novel)
NUM:date What time of year do most people fly ? (people)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the Christmas tree ? (origin)
ENTY:sport What four tournaments make up tennis ' Grand Slam ? (tournaments)
ENTY:cremat What 1964 film introduced the song My Kind of Town ? (film)
ENTY:termeq What is the term for the side of the mountain that faces the prevailing winds ? (term)
ENTY:termeq What does caliente translate to in English ? (null)
NUM:date What time of year has the most air travel ? (null)
DESC:def What does the term '' spaghetti western '' mean ? (term)
DESC:desc What are differences between 1980 and 1990 ? (differences)
HUM:ind What baseball player was walked the most times ? (null)
HUM:ind What famous male vocalist has the same name as the composer of the opera Hansel and Gretel ? (vocalist)
ENTY:food What were the first frozen foods ? (foods)
ENTY:word What is the word for love of pain or abuse ? (word)
NUM:perc What percentage of all world tornados touch down in the US ? (percentage)
HUM:ind What labor leader was last seen in the parking lot of a Michigan restaurant ? (null)
DESC:desc What motto ended Merrie Melodies cartoons ? (motto)
HUM:ind What was the name of '' The Muppets '' creator ? (Muppets)
DESC:def What is Cabarnet Sauvignon ? (Sauvignon)
DESC:def What is a virtual IP address ? (address)
ENTY:animal What 's the name of the tiger that advertises for Frosted Flakes cereal ? (name)
ENTY:color What color is Mr. Spock 's blood ? (blood)
HUM:ind What U.S. Air Force general led the first bombing raid over Tokyo ? (general)
HUM:ind What U.S. vice-president said : '' Some newspapers dispose of their garbage by printing it '' ? (newspapers)
HUM:ind What was the name of the first Watergate special prosecutor , later fired by Nixon ? (name)
HUM:gr What 's the supreme policy-making bureau of the Soviet Communist Party ? (bureau)
DESC:def What was the Vietnam War ? (War)
DESC:def What is La Nina ? (Nina)
ENTY:cremat What was the non-fiction best-seller of 1952 , 1953 and 1954 ? (seller)
DESC:def What is meant by blood SED rate ? (null)
ENTY:techmeth What 's the best way to lose the flab under your chin and around your face ? (way)
ENTY:cremat What Broadway musical featured the song , '' If I were a rich man ? '' (man)
DESC:desc What is the nursery rhyme Rock-a-by Baby about ? (rhyme)
DESC:desc What is the origin of gametophytic tissue ? (origin)
DESC:def What does Aaron mean ? (Aaron)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of hair ? (fear)
HUM:ind What is the name of the pop singer whose song became the theme song for a brand of catsup ? (song)
DESC:def What is a conifer ? (conifer)
DESC:desc What is different about the red and black fox ? (What)
DESC:def What is e-commerce ? (commerce)
HUM:gr What kind of people took part in Shays ' Rebellion in Massachusetts in 1787 ? (kind)
DESC:def What is chromatology ? (chromatology)
ENTY:cremat What are the most albums sold by one artist or band ? (albums)
ENTY:other What do goldfish lose if kept in dimly-lit or running water ? (null)
LOC:other What canal does the Thatcher Ferry Bridge span ? (null)
HUM:ind What American won the world Grand Prix driving championship in 1978 ? (Prix)
NUM:perc What are the chances of pregnacy if the penis does not penetrate the vagina ? (penis)
ENTY:other What 's the highest hand in straight poker ? (hand)
ENTY:cremat What is the name of Kevin Costner 's movie about Sioux Indians ? (name)
DESC:def What are Kythnos , Siphnos , Seriphos and Mykonos ? (Kythnos)
ENTY:other What did the Congress of Vienna establish ? (Congress)
NUM:money What is the average cost for four years of medical school ? (cost)
ENTY:substance What harmful chemicals are in bug spray ? (chemicals)
DESC:desc What did Mighty Mouse always sing as he went into action ? (Mouse)
NUM:other What 's men 's par on a 455-yard golf hole ? (par)
NUM:perc What percentage of American men are alcoholic ? (percentage)
NUM:other What are the numbers that fit into Fermont 's last theorem ? (numbers)
ENTY:other What does a heliologist study ? (null)
ENTY:product What shampoo prevents eczema , seborrhea , and psoriasis ? (shampoo)
ENTY:cremat What was the first English play written exclusively for children ? (play)
LOC:other What was the former residence of Scottish kings in Edinburgh ? (residence)
LOC:country What country buys 25 percent of the world 's tea exports ? (country)
LOC:country What country is the origin of the band the Creeps ? (origin)
ENTY:other What did the crocodile swallow in Peter Pan ? (crocodile)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word '' mushroom '' ? (origin)
NUM:other What is the number of American soldiers deployed to South Korea ? (number)
ENTY:product What is the brand name of the chemical daminozide ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What magazine paid Ernest Hemingway $15 a word to write a bullfighting article ? (magazine)
NUM:count What is the estimated total U.S. whitetail deer population ? (population)
ENTY:animal What animal received royal assent as an emblem of Canada on March 24 , 1975 ? (animal)
NUM:other What number is at 12 o 'clock on a dartboard ? (number)
DESC:desc What is the recommended daily requirement for folic acid for pregnant women ? (requirement)
ENTY:cremat What film dramatized the Scopes monkey trial ? (film)
LOC:country What country offered Albert Einstein its presidency in 1952 ? (country)
DESC:def What is the HIGHEST Roman numeral ? (numeral)
ENTY:cremat What TV series saw many of its aquatic scenes shot at Silver Springs , Florida ? (series)
ABBR:exp What is AFS ? (AFS)
ENTY:product What operating system do IBM-compatible machines use ? (machines)
HUM:ind What French leader sold Louisiana to the United States ? (leader)
LOC:other What bay sparkles next to Miami , Florida ? (bay)
LOC:other What famed river flows through Bagdad ? (river)
DESC:def What is Java ? (Java)
HUM:ind What player squats an average of 3 times during a baseball doubleheader ? (player)
HUM:ind What 's the most common name in nursery rhymes ? (name)
NUM:money What is the fine for having a dog on a beach ? (fine)
ENTY:cremat What TV show did John Sebastian sing the theme for ? (Sebastian)
DESC:def What is a mathematical factor ? (factor)
ENTY:termeq What was originally defined as one 1-millionth of the distance from the equator to the Pole ? (null)
HUM:ind What comedian hit the TV screen in 1951 with the NBC afternoon show Time for Ernie ? (comedian)
LOC:other What erupts every hour at Yellowstone National Park ? (What)
LOC:country What country contains the highest point in South America ? (country)
HUM:ind What are Arnold Palmer 's fans called ? (fans)
LOC:other What constellation represents a hunter with club and shield ? (constellation)
NUM:other What 's a perfect score in a gymnastics exercise ? (score)
HUM:gr What group included Abbey Hoffman , Jerry Rubin , and Tom Hayden ? (group)
DESC:reason What made Jane Goodall famous ? (Goodall)
LOC:city What Russian seaport has a name meaning '' Lord of the East '' ? (seaport)
DESC:desc What can be done about snoring ? (null)
LOC:mount What Rocky Mountain ridge separates North America 's eastward and westward-flowing rivers ? (ridge)
ENTY:dismed What does a chiropodist treat ? (chiropodist)
DESC:def What is porphyria ? (What)
LOC:other What gate opened on East and West Berlin ? (gate)
DESC:reason What made the Finger Lakes in western New York state ? (null)
LOC:other What 's the farthest planet from the sun ? (planet)
ENTY:dismed What chemical in red wine is good for the heart and what exactly does it do to your body ? (chemical)
ENTY:product What product '' doubles your pleasure , doubles your fun '' ? (product)
HUM:ind What son of a 15-year-old Mexican girl and a half-Irish father became the world 's most famous Greek ? (son)
ENTY:product What brand of jeans did Calvin Klein admit in a 1984 interview he felt more comfortable wearing ? (Klein)
DESC:desc What effect does friction have on perpetual motion ? (friction)
HUM:title What did the Seven Dwarfs do for a living ? (Dwarfs)
HUM:ind What 4-foot-9 actress in 1984 became the first performer to win an Oscar for playing a character of the opposite sex ? (performer)
DESC:desc What is he doing now ? (null)
HUM:ind What Mormon leader was said to have had 27 wives ? (null)
ENTY:other What video format was an alternative to VHS ? (alternative)
ENTY:substance What is money made of ? (money)
LOC:other What 's the name of a hotel in Indianapolis ? (name)
LOC:country What country was Mikhail Gorbachev the leader of ? (Gorbachev)
NUM:weight What is the recommended weight of a 15 year-old male that is 5 , 6 ? (weight)
HUM:ind What pillar of the Dutch Renaissance painted Aristotle Contemplating the Bust of Homer ? (pillar)
LOC:other What is the largest county in size in Massachusetts ? (county)
HUM:ind What is the name of the brilliant British economist behind its creation ? (name)
DESC:desc What is it like to experience a near death episode ? (What)
HUM:ind What mythical figure carries an hourglass and a scythe ? (figure)
LOC:other What natural attractions draw the most visitors in the United States ? (attractions)
HUM:gr What presidential administration challenged Americans to explore The New Frontier ? (administration)
DESC:def What is literary criticism ? (criticism)
ENTY:sport What international sport was originally called hurley ? (null)
LOC:other What river runs through Liverpool ? (river)
HUM:ind What famous British actor lost his voice after an operation in 1966 ? (actor)
DESC:def What does the term 3 mean to a newspaper editor ? (null)
HUM:gr What company makes impulse hardening equipment ? (company)
LOC:country What country was Kim Philby really working for ? (Philby)
DESC:desc What does Freddy Freeman say to become Captain Marvel Jr. ? (Jr.)
LOC:country What country was Hitler the chancellor of ? (Hitler)
HUM:ind What is Rona Barrett 's married name ? (name)
ENTY:other What are close encounters of the first and second kind ? (encounters)
ENTY:cremat What 1956 Grace Metalious novel was on the best-seller list for two years ? (novel)
HUM:ind What President hit the jogging paths to enhance his athletic image and , sporting No. 39 , almost collapsed during the road race ? (President)
DESC:desc What is the distinction of Erle Stanley Gardner 's The Case of the Terrified Typist ? (distinction)
LOC:city What North American city would you visit to see Cleopatra 's Needle ? (null)
HUM:ind What writer-journalist made his mark describing colorful Broadway and underworld characters ? (mark)
LOC:state What U.S. state has the lowest highest elevation at 6 feet ? (state)
HUM:gr What are the residents of the island of Lesbos called ? (residents)
ENTY:other What is the organizational structure of the New Delhi Indira Gandhi airport ? (structure)
HUM:ind What baseball great plugged Mr. Coffee ? (baseball)
ENTY:sport What international amateur sports spectacle was first telecast in 1956 ? (telecast)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word '' amen '' ? (origin)
ENTY:other What were Baffin , Frobisher and Franklin looking for ? (Baffin)
DESC:def What is limbo ? (limbo)
LOC:city What city contains the district of Hell 's Kitchen ? (city)
ENTY:techmeth What interesting method was used to run the credits in the early Popeye cartoons ? (null)
ENTY:substance What are the stars made of ? (stars)
HUM:ind What English physician was born on January 18 , 1779 and went on to create two important inventions ? (null)
HUM:ind What apostle is Taylor Caldwell 's Great Lion of God ? (Lion)
ENTY:dismed What anesthetic did Queen Victoria allow to be used for the birth of her seventh child , in 1853 ? (Victoria)
ENTY:substance What element , from the Periodic Table , is a gas or a solid , but never a liquid ? (gas)
DESC:def What is a tonne ? (tonne)
ABBR:exp What is DEET ? (DEET)
HUM:gr What company sells the most greeting cards ? (company)
LOC:state What U.S. state has sagebrush as its state flower ? (state)
DESC:def What is the Bernoulli Principle ? (Principle)
HUM:ind What 's comic strip photographer Peter Parker 's secret identity ? (identity)
DESC:desc What is difference between a poster and a print ? (difference)
ENTY:techmeth What are the best ways to improve employee morale at low cost ? (ways)
LOC:country What nationality is Pope John Paul II ? (II)
DESC:def What is false consciousness ? (consciousness)
ENTY:termeq What is the Scotch '' for people who know the difference '' ? (who)
LOC:other What New York City landmark has 168 steps to its crown ? (landmark)
NUM:period What is the recomended age to switch a child from a crib to a bed ? (age)
DESC:desc What are some chemical properties of mendelevium ? (properties)
NUM:count What is the average hours per months spent online by AOL users ? (hours)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word '' sideburns '' ? (sideburns)
ENTY:event What started in 1849 when gold was discovered at Sutter 's Mill ? (What)
DESC:def What is a First World country ? (country)
LOC:mount What 's the second-highest mountain in the world ? (mountain)
LOC:country What country was Erich Honecker the leader of ? (Honecker)
LOC:city What two Japanese cities are spelled with the letters K , O , O , T and Y ? (null)
DESC:def What does laser stand for ? (laser)
HUM:ind What famous film and TV cowboy lent his name to a fast food chain ? (cowboy)
DESC:def What is mandibulofacial dysostosis ? (What)
DESC:reason What was the reason for the partition of the Anglican and Vatican churches ? (reason)
DESC:def What is Butterfield 8 in Butterfield 8 ? (Butterfield)
ABBR:exp What is DTMF ? (DTMF)
ENTY:other What blew up at Lakehurst , New Jersey , on May 6 , 1977 ? (What)
LOC:country What countries does the Mont Blanc Tunnel join ? (Tunnel)
ENTY:veh What ill-fated craft was captained by Ernst Lehmann ? (null)
LOC:state What eastern state sprouted the first commercial nuclear power plant in the U.S. ? (state)
LOC:country What are the three most populated countries in the world ? (countries)
NUM:count What is the current population for these countries : France , Spain , Italy , Greece , Austria , Germany , Switzerland , the Netherlands ? (population)
NUM:period What is the youngest age a boy or girl can have an orgasm ? (boy)
ENTY:color What color is the lipstick on Boy George 's wax lips at London 's Madame Tussaud 's ? (lipstick)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the candy cane at Christmas ? (origin)
ENTY:product What is the brand name of a chemical used to control ripening ? (name)
ENTY:animal What terror of the sea did Johnny Horton sing about ? (Horton)
LOC:other What is the largest office block in the world ? (block)
ENTY:dismed What is the medical term for cancer of the blood ? (term)
LOC:country What country did the Romans call Hibernia ? (Romans)
ENTY:termeq What 's a male witch called ? (witch)
LOC:country What two countries fought the Hundred Years ' War ? (countries)
HUM:ind What was the name of the lawyer who represented Randy Steven Craft ? (who)
DESC:desc What happens to used motor oil ? (What)
ENTY:word What is the most commonly used 1 letter word in the English language ? (word)
HUM:ind What actress 's autobiography is titled Shelley : Also Known as Shirley ? (null)
ENTY:other What did Tristan come back as ? (Tristan)
LOC:country What country will hit the year 2 first ? (country)
ENTY:color What colors make up a rainbow ? (colors)
ENTY:event What war did Johnny Reb and Billy Yank fight ? (Reb)
HUM:ind What is Goldfinger 's first name ? (name)
LOC:other What square is the geographical center of London ? (center)
LOC:city What is the most populated city in the world ? (city)
NUM:money What is the cost of the drugs used in tuberculosis treatments ? (cost)
ABBR:exp What does JESSICA mean ? (JESSICA)
ENTY:event What famed gangland slaughter cut into the membership of Bugs Moran 's outfit ? (null)
DESC:desc What was Nine Tailors , the television show from 1974 , about ? (Tailors)
ENTY:food What food of the three bears did Goldilocks eat ? (Goldilocks)
DESC:def What is Boston Kreme ? (Kreme)
HUM:ind What U.S. general died December 1 , 1945 , when his jeep collided with a truck ? (jeep)
DESC:def What is a swatch ? (swatch)
DESC:def What does Ouija mean ? (Ouija)
ENTY:animal What kind of fish is a coney ? (coney)
LOC:state What state did Helen Keller call home ? (Keller)
HUM:ind What was the name of the director of the movie '' Jaws '' ? (name)
DESC:desc What steps can be taken to prevent diabetes ? (null)
DESC:desc What were the first words spoken on a film sound track ? (words)
NUM:date What year is etched on the Gold Medal of Excellence from the Paris Exposition depicted on a can of Campbell 's tomato soup ? (null)
LOC:country What country 's royal house is Bourbon-Parma ? (Parma)
ENTY:cremat What film was Jude Law in ? (Law)
ENTY:other What were the ceremony traditions like during the Elizabethian times ? (traditions)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of going to bed ? (fear)
LOC:country What country would you visit to ski in the Dolomites ? (null)
NUM:date What month 's third weekend is the Monterey Jazz Festival held on ? (Festival)
DESC:def What is the '' Global Economy '' ? (Economy)
DESC:def What is a caul ? (caul)
DESC:def What does the theory of quantum leaps mean in simpler terms ? (theory)
DESC:def What is a bone marrow transplant ? (transplant)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a classical and an acoustic guitar ? (difference)
LOC:city What African capital is named for a U.S. president ? (null)
ENTY:lang What is the name of a language spoken by the Sioux ? (name)
LOC:other What Mediterranean island is home to the first Club Med ? (home)
ENTY:other What does an edentulous smile lack ? (smile)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of jealousy ? (fear)
ENTY:cremat What is the largest sculpture in the world ? (sculpture)
LOC:other What building built in 18 contains 327 miles of book shelves ? (null)
DESC:def What is home banking ? (banking)
ENTY:cremat What William Makepeace Thackeray novel was made into a film by Stanley Kubrick ? (null)
HUM:ind What future Soviet dictator was training to be a priest when he got turned on to Marxism ? (priest)
LOC:city What U.S. city 's skyline boasts the Gateway Arch ? (skyline)
ENTY:termeq What 's the common name for a Japanese dwarf tree ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What did Thomas Paine write ? (Thomas)
ENTY:cremat What Lewis Carroll book introduced Humpty Dumpty to the world ? (book)
LOC:state What state does Charles Robb represent ? (Robb)
DESC:def What is hydroelectricity ? (hydroelectricity)
DESC:reason What causes rust ? (What)
ENTY:dismed What is the fear of the computer called ? (fear)
ENTY:techmeth What is a technique popularly used to detect birth defects ? (technique)
LOC:state What U.S. state boasts Stone Mountain , the world 's largest mass of exposed granite ? (state)
HUM:ind What British commander surrendered to George Washington at Yorktown in 1781 ? (commander)
DESC:desc What according to the Kinsey Institute , is the sexual preference of four percent of American males ? (preference)
ENTY:techmeth What is the procedure called for drilling a hole in your skull to acheive a higher consciousness ? (procedure)
HUM:ind What is the name of the president of Garmat U.S.A ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What was the name of the television show , starring Karl Madsen , that had San Francisco in the title ? (name)
DESC:def What is splatterpunk ? (splatterpunk)
DESC:desc What is the orgin of xoxoxox ? (orgin)
LOC:country What southeast Asian country has the Wang River joining the Ping River at Tak ? (country)
LOC:city What Italian city of 155 were Leonardo da Vinci , Michaelangelo , and Machiavelli all working in ? (Vinci)
ENTY:color What color tennis balls are used at Wimbledon ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What is a 2-sided object called ? (object)
ENTY:cremat What movie has made the most money ? (movie)
DESC:def What is time ? (time)
LOC:city What is the name of the largest city in Chile , South America ? (name)
ENTY:other What are you caught in if a haboob blows up ? (haboob)
NUM:perc What ratio of children of ages between two and eleven watch ' The Simpsons ' ? (null)
HUM:gr What famous meat company went out of business because it became known that the underworld had been selling them kangaroo meat ? (underworld)
NUM:other What is the population of Mexico ? (population)
LOC:other What is the best online games site ? (site)
NUM:date What century did art 's Romantic Period begin in ? (Period)
DESC:def What is a cake of soap ? (cake)
NUM:weight What is the weight of a teaspoon of matter in a black hole ? (weight)
NUM:weight What is the approximate weight of a teaspoon of matter in a black hole ? (weight)
ABBR:exp What does MSG stand for ? (MSG)
ENTY:other What is April 's gemstone ? (gemstone)
HUM:ind What is the present Pope named ? (What)
ENTY:food What powdered soft drink mix went into space ? (mix)
ENTY:other What did the Chinese emperor present to the English soldier Gordon in recognition of his services in quelling rebellions ? (emperor)
ENTY:lang What is one of the languages spoken by the Sioux called ? (What)
LOC:country What country 's flag is field green ? (flag)
ENTY:sport What sport is known for hooligans ? (null)
ENTY:sport What sport was the first televised in the U.S. ? (sport)
DESC:desc What are the lyrics to '' Smelly Cat '' ? (lyrics)
NUM:date What year was the first automobile manufactured ? (automobile)
ENTY:event What concerts are held in New York this week ? (null)
DESC:desc What are the requirements for becoming a citizen of Australia ? (citizen)
HUM:gr What are the top ten all-time money making NFL teams ? (money)
ENTY:other What were hairy bank notes in the fur trade ? (notes)
DESC:def What is idealab ! ? (What)
LOC:country What country borders the most others ? (country)
ABBR:exp What does the E stand for in the equation E=mc2 ? (null)
LOC:other What river runs through Colorado , Kansas , and Oklahoma ? (river)
DESC:def What is Win Rah ? (Rah)
HUM:gr What college enlivens Hanover , New Hampshire ? (null)
ABBR:exp What does VCR stand for ? (VCR)
HUM:ind What doctor is synonymous with footwear and foot care ? (doctor)
NUM:other What are the shoe sizes of O 'Neal , Jordan , and Mutombo , the NBA players ? (sizes)
ENTY:event What was the name of the Crimean meeting of Roosevelt , Churchill , and Stalin ? (Stalin)
HUM:title What are the only players eligible to score points in Roller Derby called ? (players)
NUM:other What are the statistics for drunken drivers in Maryland ? (statistics)
HUM:ind What ill-fated American general dragged a bull terrier named Willie through World War II ? (general)
NUM:other What 's the score of a forfeited baseball game ? (score)
ENTY:animal What is the name of David Letterman 's dog ? (name)
HUM:ind What U.S. senator once played basketball for the New York Knicks ? (senator)
ENTY:sport What are the titles of some R-Rated Sony Playstation games ? (titles)
ENTY:symbol What playing card symbolizes death ? (card)
DESC:def What is an urban legend ? (legend)
HUM:ind What is Li 'l Abner 's last name ? (l)
LOC:country What two countries are separated by the Bering Strait ? (null)
DESC:def What is Smartnet ? (Smartnet)
ENTY:termeq What is a synonym for aspartame ? (synonym)
DESC:def What are vermicilli , rigati , zitoni , and tubetti ? (null)
HUM:ind What architect originated the glass house designed the Chicago Federal Center had a philosophy of '' less is more , '' and produced plans that were the forerunner of the California ranch house ? (forerunner)
ENTY:animal What animal do buffalo wings come from ? (wings)
DESC:reason What is the purpose of the SysRq key on my computer keyboard ? (purpose)
LOC:country What was the first country to put a second woman in space ? (country)
ENTY:other What was the 24-disc John Gabel Entertainer the first example of , in 1960 ? (Entertainer)
DESC:def What is the feudal system ? (system)
ENTY:termeq What 's the geographic term for the submerged fringe of a continent ? (term)
LOC:other What prison is found in Ossining , New York ? (null)
LOC:country What country has declared one-fifth of its territory off-limits to Russians ? (country)
DESC:desc What is the main application of sodium hydrosulfite ? (application)
ENTY:other What are the components of polyester ? (components)
ENTY:product What product features a frog that says '' dig 'em '' ? (product)
HUM:ind What Hall of Fame pitcher started three World Series Games for the New York Yankees in 1962 ? (Hall)
LOC:other What is the longest river in the United States ? (river)
ABBR:exp What does the channel ESPN stand for ? (channel)
LOC:other What river is Windsor Castle on ? (Castle)
ENTY:product What is the best brand for a laptop computer ? (brand)
DESC:def What do pointed letters mean to a handwriting analyst ? (letters)
HUM:gr What political party is Sinn Fein a part of ? (Fein)
ENTY:event What was Franklin Roosevelt 's program for economic recovery called during the Great Depression ? (program)
HUM:ind What is the name of a Greek god ? (name)
LOC:city What 's the capital of Taiwan ? (capital)
ENTY:other What did Englishman John Hawkins begin selling to New World colonists in 1562 ? (Hawkins)
NUM:money What is the starting salary for beginning lawyers ? (salary)
HUM:ind What was the man 's name who was killed in a duel with Aaron Burr ? (name)
ENTY:other What did Louis Cartier invent for aviator Santos Dumont in 1940 ? (Cartier)
NUM:money What will the California gas tax be in the year 2000 ? (California)
LOC:city What city is served by Tempelhol Airport ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the name Igor ? (origin)
ENTY:cremat What was the first Gilbert and Sullivan opera ? (Gilbert)
HUM:ind What two historical figures , who fought each other in a famous battle , each have a food named after them ? (who)
LOC:country What country in 1998 had the most suicides regardless of population size ? (country)
NUM:money What is the price for tuberculosis drugs ? (price)
NUM:money What was the first minimum wage ? (wage)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a college and a university ? (difference)
ENTY:substance What substance did Joseph Priestley name for its ability to erase pencil marks ? (substance)
DESC:desc What are the limits to '' self-defense ? '' (limits)
ENTY:food What fast food is prepared with a '' secret blend of 11 herbs and spices ? '' (null)
DESC:desc What effect does a prism have on light ? (prism)
DESC:def What is software piracy ? (piracy)
NUM:date What year was Janet Jackson 's first album released ? (album)
HUM:ind What TV character sired a horse named Thunder ? (character)
DESC:desc What are some children 's rights ? (rights)
LOC:other What is the name of the planet that the Ewoks live on ? (Ewoks)
HUM:ind What baseball player was known as Charley Hustle ? (null)
ENTY:symbol What 's the symbol for the zodiacal sign Gemini ? (symbol)
HUM:gr What hockey team did Wayne Gretzky play for ? (Gretzky)
ENTY:event What series of trials followed World War II ? (series)
HUM:gr What Ivy League school plays its home games at Palmer Stadium ? (school)
ENTY:termeq What was the eighth day following the Nones in each month of the Roman calendar called ? (day)
HUM:ind What singer 's theme song was When the Moon Comes over the Mountain ? (Moon)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of money ? (fear)
LOC:other What celestial body has a diameter of 864 , 000 miles ? (body)
HUM:gr What was the Ventura County police department that seized the county 's largest amount of cocaine ever ? (department)
ENTY:animal What is the name of the Family Circus 's dog ? (name)
ENTY:other What did Martin Luther post on the church door at Wittenberg ? (null)
DESC:def What is the meaning of the name Kathryn ? (meaning)
LOC:country What country borders Denmark to the south ? (country)
DESC:desc What should you do for an ankle sprain ? (null)
ENTY:other What dropped 1 , 313 feet in 1980 ? (What)
ENTY:dismed What is the name of the vaccine for chicken pox ? (name)
HUM:ind What two US biochemists won the Nobel Prize in medicine in 1992 ? (biochemists)
HUM:gr What record company was formed by Herb Alpert and Jerry Moss ? (null)
DESC:def What is thermal equilibrium ? (equilibrium)
ENTY:termeq What is a term for behavior , appearance , or expression that violates the accepted standards of sexual morality ? (term)
HUM:gr What fast-food magnate 's initials graced the left sleeve of the San Diego Padres ' baseball uniforms in 1984 ? (initials)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the typing practice sentence '' Now is the time for all good men to come to the aid of their country '' ? (men)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of reptiles ? (fear)
ENTY:cremat What does Knight Ridder publish ? (Ridder)
LOC:city What city is . KDGE Radio located in ? (city)
ENTY:other What can one see in Reims ? (null)
LOC:city What city was Bobby Kennedy assassinated in ? (Kennedy)
ENTY:other What 's the highest possible bid in Contract Bridge ? (bid)
DESC:def What is the medical condition of hypertension ? (condition)
LOC:other What London museum features a Chamber of Horrors ? (museum)
LOC:city What city is served by McCarren Airport ? (null)
DESC:def What is Doegs ? (Doegs)
ENTY:religion What two major world religions began in India ? (religions)
ENTY:dismed What kind of poisoning is known as plumbism ? (null)
ENTY:other What is the greatest source of '' white '' magic in the Marvel Universe ? (source)
NUM:other What amount of folic acid should an expectant mother take daily ? (mother)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of stings ? (fear)
LOC:state What state on the Gulf of Mexico has its lowest point five feet below sea level ? (state)
ENTY:veh What was the name of Robert Fulton 's most famous steamboat ? (name)
NUM:perc What are the chances of pregnacy if the penis does not penetrate the vagina ? (penis)
DESC:def What is infomatics ? (infomatics)
DESC:reason What is the purpose of BIOS ? (purpose)
ENTY:cremat What is the name of the kids ' show from Canadian Public TV with the singing pineapple ? (name)
LOC:country What country did the Mau Mau Uprising take place in ? (Uprising)
LOC:other What are some good medical sites for information ? (sites)
ENTY:other What does a resurrectionist steal ? (resurrectionist)
HUM:gr What is the best art and design school in the world ? (art)
ENTY:food What two vegetables are combined in succotash ? (null)
ABBR:exp What does NASA stand for ? (NASA)
NUM:date What month did the Edmund Fitzgerald sink ? (Fitzgerald)
HUM:gr What manufacturers are there in Texas ? (manufacturers)
DESC:def What is a pig in a poke ? (pig)
LOC:state What U.S. state are the Finger Lakes in ? (Lakes)
DESC:def What is a cullion ? (cullion)
LOC:city What are the ten safest American cities for pedestrians ? (cities)
HUM:ind What TV detective did Craig Stevens play ? (Stevens)
DESC:reason What are the most common causes of death in the U.S. ? (causes)
HUM:gr What university fired Angela Davis ? (university)
LOC:state What U.S. state does the Continental Divide leave to enter Canada ? (Divide)
LOC:other What 's the name of the Wilkes plantation in Gone with the Wind ? (name)
DESC:def What is barnstorming ? (What)
ENTY:animal What 's the dumbest domesticated animal ? (animal)
DESC:desc What was the importance of Magellan ? (importance)
DESC:manner What do I have to do to get good grades in school ? (null)
ABBR:abb What does the number '' 5 '' stand for on FUBU clothing ? (number)
ENTY:food What four tastes can a human distinguish ? (tastes)
HUM:gr What is '' the airline built for professional travelers '' ? (airline)
ENTY:veh What two vessels fought the first sea battle between iron-covered ships ? (vessels)
NUM:perc What percentage of the silver production is done by independent silversmiths ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the term '' buffalo wings '' that is used as a menu item in bars across the nation for chicken wings in a spicey sauce ? (origin)
NUM:date What date is Boxing Day ? (Day)
ENTY:cremat What 1953 film won Frank Sinatra a best supporting actor Oscar ? (film)
DESC:desc What type of childhood did Jules Verne have ? (Verne)
DESC:def What is a leper ? (leper)
LOC:other What was Einstein 's birthplace ? (birthplace)
ENTY:other What was George Washington afraid of ? (Washington)
NUM:date What century 's the setting for TV 's The Adventures of Robin Hood ? (setting)
ENTY:cremat What are the top 5 fiction books of all time ? (books)
DESC:def What are the '' Star Wars '' satellites ? (Wars)
NUM:money What debts did Qintex group leave ? (group)
ENTY:termeq What is the term for someone who hates mankind ? (who)
ENTY:other What did San Francisco 's Milt Harper grow that measured 24 inches from tip to tip in 1974 ? (Harper)
HUM:gr What college did Dikembe Mutombo play basketball for ? (Mutombo)
DESC:def What is a philanthropist ? (philanthropist)
DESC:def What is a portal ? (What)
ENTY:cremat What Tom Wolfe book is about the Mercury astronauts ? (book)
ENTY:food What cooking oil has '' corn goodness '' ? (null)
NUM:money What is the per-capita income of Colombia , South America ? (income)
ENTY:termeq What is the term that describes a word where only one usage has been recorded in all literature ? (term)
ENTY:techmeth What measures did Clinton take to avoid the draft ? (Clinton)
ENTY:termeq What are '' darning needles '' and '' horse stingers '' better known as ? (null)
LOC:other What general direction does the journey in Around the World in 80 Days proceed in ? (Days)
ENTY:food What do penguins eat ? (penguins)
HUM:gr What organization is the Security Council a part of ? (Council)
LOC:mount What is New England 's highest mountain ? (mountain)
ENTY:cremat What TV station did Mary Richards work for ? (Richards)
DESC:def What does idle mean ? (What)
DESC:reason What was the claim to fame of the football game that saw Fordham defeat Waynesburg State 12601 on September 3 , 1939 ? (Fordham)
DESC:def What is a serigraph ? (serigraph)
ENTY:sport What football bowl game 's first queen was Hallie Woods ? (Woods)
NUM:date What year did the War of 1812 begin ? (War)
ENTY:animal What racehorse won an Associated Press poll as the greatest horse of the 20th century ? (racehorse)
DESC:desc What are the words to the cd Eminem 's , or slim shady , '' My Name Is '' ? (Name)
ENTY:termeq What does Final Four refer to in the sports world ? (Four)
ENTY:cremat What medium is Stuart Hamblen the first singing cowboy in ? (Hamblen)
DESC:def What is the meaning of '' subaru ? '' (meaning)
DESC:def What is endometriosis ? (endometriosis)
DESC:def What is a geoscientist ? (geoscientist)
HUM:ind What robust U.S. President imported his own instructor after seeing a judo match ? (President)
ENTY:food What are all the different types of pizza ? (types)
ABBR:exp What does BTU mean ? (BTU)
HUM:gr What government department did The Untouchables work for ? (Untouchables)
ENTY:food What drink is made up of rum , coconut milk and pineapple ? (null)
DESC:def What is the VDRL test of blood ? (test)
NUM:code What seven digits follow the area code in the number for long distance information ? (digits)
HUM:ind What was the player 's name who played nose tackle for the Eagles in Super Bowl XV ? (who)
HUM:title What did Andy Hardy 's father do for a living ? (father)
ENTY:cremat What film opens with an assassin tumbling from the Seattle Space Needle ? (assassin)
DESC:def What is a leaky heart valve ? (valve)
DESC:def What is the definition of the Scrabble word ' syzygy ' ? (definition)
NUM:money What is the salary of a U.S. Representative ? (salary)
LOC:other What man-made waterways is 1.76 miles long ? (waterways)
NUM:count What 's the maximum length , in inches , of a first baseman 's glove ? (length)
LOC:country What country is located at 13 degrees North latitude and 10 degrees East longitude ? (null)
NUM:count What is the pig population of the world ? (population)
LOC:city What city does McCarren Airport serve ? (Airport)
NUM:count What is the most number of goals scored by a single team in an NHL hockey game ? (number)
DESC:def What are the Low Countries ? (Countries)
ENTY:animal What rabbit got its name because its ears resembled those of a jackass ? (ears)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of trees ? (fear)
HUM:ind What actor has a tattoo on his right wrist reading Scotland Forever ? (actor)
ENTY:event What holidays or observances are celebrated in Italy ? (null)
DESC:def What exactly is radiation ? (radiation)
LOC:city What are the two cities in Dicken 's '' A Tale of Two Cities '' ? (cities)
HUM:ind What English queen had six fingers on one hand ? (queen)
LOC:other What river runs through Liverpool ? (river)
ENTY:food What kind of nuts are used in marzipan ? (null)
ENTY:other What does a polyorchid man have at least three of ? (man)
DESC:desc What exactly , specifically does sleep do for you ? (null)
NUM:date What time of year is air travel the heaviest ? (travel)
DESC:def What does a red flag mean in auto racing ? (flag)
LOC:other What 's the longest river in Canada ? (river)
DESC:def What is osteichthyes ? (What)
HUM:ind What tennis player has the nickname '' Nasty '' ? (player)
HUM:ind What non-conformist abstract painter was dubbed Jack The Dripper by Time ? (null)
ENTY:color What color is most often used to symbolize truth ? (null)
NUM:count What was the Great Britain population from 1699-172 ? (population)
ENTY:termeq What is the term for the sum of all genetic material in a given organism ? (term)
ENTY:cremat What is the best-selling television soundtrack of all time ? (soundtrack)
LOC:mount What mountain range marks the border of France and Spain ? (range)
ENTY:cremat What late-night TV show features Larry , Bud , Melman and Toast on a Stick ? (show)
ENTY:product What is the fastest computer ? (computer)
ENTY:termeq What 's the term for a limestone deposit rising from the floor of a cave ? (term)
HUM:ind What bestselling modern poet was the co-founder of the famous City Lights Bookshop in San Francisco ? (founder)
DESC:def What does the term glory hole mean ? (hole)
HUM:ind What South Vietnamese president was assassinated by his generals in 1963 ? (null)
DESC:def What 's the staff of life mentioned in the Lord 's Prayer ? (staff)
ENTY:other What ability has the silkworm moth lost through domestication ? (ability)
DESC:desc What do you need to do to marry someone in jail ? (null)
NUM:perc What is the Pennsylvania state income tax rate ? (rate)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of sourness ? (fear)
HUM:ind What was Thatcher 's first name ? (name)
DESC:desc What do insects do through their spiracles ? (insects)
ENTY:lang What are the languages spoken by the natives in Afghanistan ? (languages)
DESC:desc What is the origin of Boxing Day ? (origin)
ENTY:cremat What Robert Louis Stevenson novel was inspired by Deacon William Brodie , a cabinetmaker by day and burglar by night ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of rejection ? (fear)
DESC:desc What was the rallying cry of the early American revolutionaries ? (cry)
ENTY:product What is the best selling computer model ever ? (model)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of food ? (fear)
NUM:period What is the life expectancy of an elephant ? (expectancy)
DESC:desc What are the short- and long-term effects of underage drinking ? (short-)
DESC:reason What 's the claim to fame of night watchman Frank Wills ? (claim)
ENTY:cremat What 1981 Candice Bergen-Jacqueline Bisset movie was a remake of 1943 's Old Acquaintance ? (remake)
NUM:money What is the fare cost for the round trip between New York and London on Concorde ? (cost)
DESC:def What is a bone marrow transplant meant for ? (transplant)
DESC:def What does the name Calder mean ? (name)
LOC:other What is the location of McCarren Airport ? (location)
ABBR:exp What does the abbreviation OAS stand for ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What is the nickname of the Cleveland Indians ? (nickname)
ENTY:cremat What Frederick Forsyth novel chronicles the toppling of an African government by mercenaries ? (novel)
DESC:reason What makes Black Hills , South Dakota a tourist attraction ? (Dakota)
ENTY:animal What was the name of Baretta 's cockatoo ? (name)
HUM:gr What 's Japan 's largest car manufacturer ? (manufacturer)
ENTY:termeq What do you call a date that contains sequencing numbers , like 9-8-98 ? (null)
ENTY:color What color is the cross on Switzerland 's flag ? (cross)
LOC:other What is the largest island in the Mediterranean Sea ? (island)
NUM:money What was Joe Namath 's first contract worth ? (contract)
DESC:reason What is Archimedes famous for ? (Archimedes)
ENTY:food What 's the most delicate-tasting member of the onion family ? (member)
LOC:other What landmark Italian restaurant can be found at 239 West 48th Street , New York City ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What do you call a book of quotes ? (null)
LOC:other What are some mythology websites ? (websites)
DESC:def What is cunnilingus ? (What)
ENTY:cremat What 1942 espionage movie reunited director John Huston with Maltese Falconers Humphrey Bogart , Mary Astor , and Sidney Greenstreet ? (movie)
LOC:country What nationality is Ileana Cotrubas ? (Cotrubas)
DESC:def What is object-oriented design ? (design)
NUM:other What is the population of Kansas ? (population)
HUM:ind What is the name of the deranged super-criminal Otto Octavius uses ? (Octavius)
ENTY:cremat What is Dr. Seuss ' most popular book ? (book)
DESC:def What does verdandi mean ? (null)
ENTY:animal What animal dined on bread and oysters with a carpenter ? (animal)
LOC:other What island group is Guadalcanal a part of ? (Guadalcanal)
DESC:desc What is the origin of '' barbeque '' ? (origin)
LOC:country What 's the only East european country not tied to the ruble ? (country)
NUM:date What is Judy Garland 's date of birth ? (date)
ABBR:exp What does HIV stand for ? (HIV)
ENTY:termeq What is Shirley MacLaine known as ? (What)
ENTY:techmeth What are the 7 principles of learning from the Institute for Research on Learning , IRL ? (principles)
ENTY:cremat What book was F. Scott Fitzgerald working on when he died in Hollywood in 194 ? (Fitzgerald)
NUM:dist What is the length of border between the Ukraine and Russia ? (length)
ABBR:exp What is HDLC ? (HDLC)
ENTY:food What joins white wine to put the spritz in a Spritzer ? (What)
DESC:def What is a nematode ? (nematode)
DESC:def What is the meaning of '' CPR '' ? (meaning)
ENTY:color What color are seven of every 10 houses in the U.S. ? (color)
ENTY:other What does a phobophobe fear ? (null)
DESC:def What is capitalism according to Max Weber ? (capitalism)
LOC:country What country has the highest arson rate ? (country)
ENTY:color What color beans did the ancient Romans refuse to eat ? (Romans)
ENTY:techmeth What do sailors use to measure time ? (sailors)
LOC:city What city does Orly Airport serve ? (Airport)
ENTY:sport What 's the most popular form of gambling with women in Las Vegas ? (form)
HUM:title What task does the Bouvier breed of dog perform ? (task)
NUM:period What is the average time to kiss somene ? (time)
LOC:country What are the top five oil-producing countries in the world ? (countries)
HUM:ind What New Orleans D.A. claimed : '' My staff and I solved the assassination weeks ago '' ? (D.A.)
ENTY:other What is Bella Abzug 's sartorial trademark ? (trademark)
HUM:ind What was the real name of writer Ross Macdonald , creator of the hero Lew Archer ? (name)
ENTY:animal What spider makes a superb pet , even said to recognize its master ? (spider)
DESC:def What does the word affiant mean ? (affiant)
ENTY:veh What vehicles are raced in the Tour de France ? (null)
ENTY:other What does it take to be a hero ? (hero)
ENTY:animal What animal causes the biggest threat to humans ? (animal)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of ruin ? (fear)
LOC:country What countries have the most auto thefts ? (countries)
HUM:ind What director portrayed the commandant of the POW camp in 1953 's Stalag 17 ? (director)
HUM:ind What are the names of Jacques Cousteau 's two sons ? (names)
ENTY:cremat What British TV series inspired All in the Family ? (series)
DESC:def What does the word terrorism mean ? (terrorism)
DESC:def What does N est-ce pas mean ? (pas)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word '' tampon '' ? (origin)
HUM:ind What World War II leader declared : '' The blow has been struck '' ? (leader)
ENTY:color What is the most popular sports car color ? (color)
LOC:country What country boasts Ismail 's Palace and the Palace of King Farouk ? (country)
ENTY:cremat What Broadway show introduced the song Some Enchanted Evening ? (null)
DESC:def What is a plant supplement ? (supplement)
ENTY:product What product did William Horlick discover and produce ? (Horlick)
HUM:title What occupation has the highest divorce rate ? (occupation)
ENTY:food What drink contains as many types of rum as possible ? (drink)
HUM:ind What California governor said : '' Inaction may be the highest form of action '' ? (form)
DESC:def What is an ecological niche ? (niche)
DESC:desc What facial feature did Walt Disney sport that none of Disney 's employees is allowed to ? (null)
HUM:gr What are the top 10 colleges in the United States in the field of engineering ? (colleges)
NUM:perc What is the probability that at least 2 out of 25 people will have the same birthday ? (people)
ENTY:substance What is a softball made of ? (softball)
ENTY:other What '' little red car '' is mentioned in pop singer Prince 's hit song ? (null)
ENTY:animal What kind of species is the monster in the film '' Jaws '' ? (monster)
DESC:def What is a drought ? (drought)
DESC:desc What are the benefits of home school ? (benefits)
LOC:country What Scandinavian country covers 173 , 732 square miles ? (country)
ENTY:cremat What is the best-selling book of all time ? (book)
DESC:desc What do Hank Aaron , Jimmy Stewart , and Howard K. Smith have in common ? (Aaron)
ENTY:word What are the first six words of Dickens 's A Tale of Two Cities ? (words)
LOC:city What city boasts the Billingsgate fishmarket ? (city)
LOC:country What country lies directly south of Detroit ? (country)
LOC:mount What is the tallest mountain ? (mountain)
DESC:desc What is '' the computer for the rest of us '' ? (computer)
DESC:desc What nuclear process takes place in an H-bomb ? (process)
NUM:count What 's the maximum number of clubs a golfer may use in a round ? (golfer)
ENTY:other What card suit originally represented the peasant class ? (suit)
ENTY:word What 's the Hungarian word for pepper ? (word)
ENTY:product What does the Peugeot company manufacture ? (company)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of everything ? (fear)
DESC:def What is office automation ? (automation)
ENTY:instru What instrument does Benny Carter play ? (Carter)
HUM:ind What knighted actor narrates TV 's The World at War ? (actor)
ENTY:techmeth What eating utensils are used for handicapped kids ? (null)
HUM:ind What football coach 's story was told in the movie Run to Daylight ? (null)
HUM:gr What businesses in Alaska were affected by the Exxon Valdez oil spill ? (null)
DESC:desc What does Lloyd 's Lutine Bell announce ? (Bell)
ENTY:other What do opposite faces of a die always add up to ? (faces)
HUM:ind What was the name of Randy Craft 's lawyer ? (name)
DESC:def What is '' cat scratch fever '' ? (fever)
LOC:state What New England state covers 5.9 square miles ? (state)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviation for Original Equipment Manufacturer ? (abbreviation)
ENTY:substance What did the ancients call the four great elements ? (ancients)
ENTY:animal What animal 's tail is called a brush ? (null)
ENTY:veh What were the names of the three ships used by Columbus ? (names)
NUM:other What is the horsepower of the shuttle boosters ? (horsepower)
ENTY:other What is predicted to topple over between 2010 and 2020 ? (null)
ENTY:substance What kind of crystals exist ? (kind)
ENTY:food What do ladybugs eat ? (null)
ENTY:substance What is the Taj Majal made of ? (Majal)
HUM:ind What Argentine boxer was shot dead outside a Nevada brothel in May ? (null)
LOC:country What country boasts the most cars per mile of road ? (country)
DESC:desc What happened to Pompeii ? (What)
ENTY:other What does a farrier put shoes on ? (farrier)
ENTY:substance What does saliva consist of ? (saliva)
HUM:ind What is Jimmy Olsen 's full name ? (name)
ENTY:termeq What is another name for nearsightedness ? (name)
HUM:ind What famous New York City mayor wrote the hit song , '' Will You Love Me in December as You Do in May ? '' (mayor)
LOC:city What Russian city used to be called St. Petersburg and Petrograd ? (city)
DESC:def What is the definition of a witch ? (definition)
DESC:def What are the cookies in Internet ? (cookies)
HUM:ind What U.S. President was the first to breed mules ? (President)
DESC:desc What is the difference between molecules and compounds ? (difference)
HUM:ind What astronomer-architect designed the present St. Paul 's Cathedral in London ? (architect)
HUM:ind What feminist wrote Sexual Politics and Flying ? (feminist)
ENTY:symbol What is the zodiac sign for August 14 ? (sign)
HUM:gr What university football team did O.J. Simpson take to the Rose Bowl ? (Simpson)
ABBR:exp What does snafu stand for ? (snafu)
ENTY:color What color is Chablis ? (Chablis)
HUM:gr What NFL team did Vince Lombardi end his coaching career with ? (Lombardi)
DESC:desc What is the difference between fatalism and determinism ? (difference)
LOC:other What are some good fractal web sites ? (sites)
LOC:country What country imposed the Berlin Blockade in 1948 ? (country)
ENTY:food What future movie treat was introduced to American colonists in 1603 by Native Americans ? (null)
LOC:other What kind of habitat does the scorpion live in ? (scorpion)
ENTY:cremat What sports magazine has the largest circulation ? (magazine)
ENTY:other What is the legal blood alcohol limit for the state of California ? (limit)
LOC:country What country 's capital was formed when Pesth and Buda merged ? (Pesth)
DESC:desc What is the origin of U.S. Army sergeant 's stripes ? (origin)
DESC:def What is proposition 98 about ? (proposition)
LOC:city What town was the setting for The Music Man ? (setting)
ENTY:other What was Simple Simon fishing for in his mother 's pail ? (fishing)
ENTY:cremat What did Woody Allen call the Japanese gangster film he dubbed into English as a comedy ? (Allen)
HUM:title What title does comedian Henry Youngman claim ? (null)
ENTY:food What is '' the taste that beats the others cold '' ? (taste)
ENTY:sport What kind of sports did they play in the years 1642-1649 , the English Civil War time ? (null)
DESC:reason What makes salt ? (What)
HUM:gr What company has built more than 2.5 billion little green houses since 1935 ? (company)
NUM:money What will the increase be in the California gas tax by 2000 ? (increase)
ENTY:food What whisky is '' known by the company it keeps '' ? (whisky)
HUM:ind What appointments secretary to Richard Nixon went to jail ? (appointments)
HUM:ind What is the name of the American who was captured when his plane went down over Syrian-held Lebanon ? (plane)
DESC:def What is lung cancer ? (cancer)
HUM:gr What school does Tom attend in Tom Brown 's School Days ? (Tom)
HUM:ind What basketball player is credited with 23 , 924 rebounds ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What does Playboy title its '' continuing dialog on contemporary issues between Playboy and its readers '' ? (Playboy)
LOC:other What was the birthplace of Edgar Allen Poe ? (birthplace)
ENTY:other What does it take to become a lawyer ? (lawyer)
HUM:ind What American sergeant lost both of his hands in combat during World War II and then went on to act in a single movie for which he won two Oscars ? (sergeant)
LOC:other What room did W.C. Fields keep his library in ? (Fields)
DESC:reason What causes an earthquake ? (What)
HUM:ind What Batman character tools around on a Batcycle ? (null)
ENTY:body What are the main blood vessels ? (vessels)
DESC:def What does '' saute '' mean ? (null)
ENTY:animal What type is a snail ? (snail)
ENTY:food What are the top vegetable crops in the world ? (crops)
LOC:other What volcano showers ash on Sicily ? (volcano)
DESC:desc What are the rules to '' snow golf '' ? (rules)
ENTY:termeq What does Warner Bros. call a flightless cuckoo ? (Bros.)
ENTY:substance What are super balls made of ? (balls)
HUM:ind What 's the name of Tom Sawyer 's aunt with whom he lives ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What is the fastest-growing comic strip of all time ? (strip)
HUM:ind What doctor claimed in a 1946 book : '' There is no such thing as a bad boy '' ? (thing)
HUM:ind What comedian created a punch-drunk pugilist named Cauliflower McPugg ? (comedian)
ENTY:cremat What is the movie Jonathan Livingstone Seagull ? (movie)
NUM:weight What is the weight of air ? (weight)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of children ? (fear)
DESC:def What is ouzo ? (What)
ENTY:sport What race is 1 , 137 miles long ? (race)
LOC:city What is the capital of Uruguay ? (capital)
ABBR:exp What does the T.S. stand for in T.S. Eliot 's name ? (T.S.)
DESC:def What is making love ? (What)
LOC:other What are the largest deserts in the world ? (deserts)
LOC:state What is the richest state in the U.S. ? (state)
DESC:def What is a urologist ? (urologist)
HUM:ind What actress starred in '' The Lion in Winter '' ? (actress)
ENTY:other What 's bottled in jeroboams ? (null)
HUM:title What is Nicholas Cage 's profession ? (profession)
DESC:desc What qualifications are there for individuals donating blood ? (qualifications)
LOC:other What California bridge was Don Brown the first to cross , on May 27 , 1937 ? (Brown)
DESC:desc What is the history of the hairdryer ? (history)
ENTY:other What trade did the 15th and 16th century Portuguese hope to control between Asia and Europe ? (trade)
DESC:desc What happened in the city of Dogtown in 1899 ? (What)
LOC:city What was the largest city in the world to declare martial law in 1989 ? (city)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of sinning ? (fear)
NUM:money What was the first minimum wage ? (wage)
LOC:mount What is the name of the highest mountain in Africa ? (name)
LOC:mount What mountain range extends from the Gulf of St. Lawrence to Alabama ? (range)
ENTY:plant What are some colorful flowers that will bloom in the fall in New England ? (flowers)
ENTY:other What 's the second-most-used murder weapon in the U.S. ? (weapon)
HUM:gr What businesses or agencies would do an employment verification ? (businesses)
HUM:ind What famous coach said '' if you can 't beat 'em in the alley , you can 't beat 'em on the ice '' ? (coach)
HUM:ind What onetime member of Ronald Reagan 's cabinet called federal policy toward Indians '' an example of the failure of socialism '' ? (member)
ENTY:lang What are the four most widely-used languages in North America ? (languages)
ENTY:event What war was fought by the Spanish as far as the Philippines ? (null)
LOC:city What is the largest city in Connecticut ? (city)
NUM:other What is the population of the United States ? (population)
HUM:ind What actor and actress have made the most movies ? (actor)
DESC:def What is the definition of spamming ? (definition)
ABBR:exp What does IQ stand for ? (IQ)
LOC:country What country is the largest diamond producer ? (producer)
ENTY:food What beer is ' rockin ' America ? '' (America)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of women ? (fear)
ENTY:termeq What are dinosaur droppings called ? (droppings)
DESC:desc What was the infamous feat of Germany 's U-2 submarine ? (feat)
ENTY:cremat What Homerian epic chronicles events toward the end of the Trojan Wars ? (Homerian)
ENTY:other What is widely used to detect prenatal birth defects ? (null)
ENTY:animal What kind of mammal is a colt ? (colt)
ENTY:color What color are a cherry tree 's flowers ? (flowers)
ENTY:animal What class of animals makes up more than two-thirds of known species ? (class)
ENTY:animal What was the name of Sergeant Preston of the Yukon 's lead dog ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What film featured a snarly character named Kid Shelleen ? (film)
HUM:gr What company named one of its pens '' The Banana '' ? (company)
LOC:city What 's the capital of Monaco ? (capital)
NUM:weight What do Englishmen weigh themselves in ? (Englishmen)
ENTY:other What is it that walks on four legs , then on two legs , then on three ? (What)
ENTY:event What is the name of the 1919 occurrence in which British troops killed over 3 unarmed Indian protestors ? (troops)
LOC:state What state is the Filenes store located in ? (store)
NUM:money What is the starting salary of a radiographer ? (salary)
DESC:def What is a disaccharide ? (disaccharide)
ENTY:sport What star-faring race brought about the Inhumans on Marvel 's Earth ? (race)
DESC:def What does appropriates money mean ? (money)
HUM:ind What is the name of Dolly Parton 's rarely seen husband ? (name)
DESC:def What is a '' False Moon '' ? (Moon)
ENTY:other What 1976 Deep Throat clone provides the leading lady with a second larynx ? (clone)
ENTY:other What line of luggage is named after a famous American flier ? (null)
ENTY:word What is a word whose letters can be rearranged to form a different word ? (word)
NUM:ord What chapter of Gone with the Wind has Rhett Butler leaving Scarlett O 'Hara ? (Butler)
ENTY:cremat What program do I need to run a .tbk file ? (null)
LOC:other What is the seafaring name for the southern tip of South America ? (name)
HUM:ind What two New York Yankee pitchers swapped wives and families ? (pitchers)
ENTY:dismed What are the 10 plagues of Egypt ? (plagues)
DESC:desc What is the history of Hot Wheels cars , and how are they produced ? (What)
ENTY:termeq What is the rounded part on the top of a matchbook called ? (part)
NUM:date What 's the third month of the Gregorian calendar ? (month)
LOC:country What country owns Corsica ? (country)
ENTY:sport What sport features slotbacks , tailbacks , and touchbacks ? (sport)
ENTY:food What meat complemented sweet potatoes and peas in the first TV dinner ? (meat)
ABBR:exp What is RAM in the computer ? (RAM)
DESC:def What is a '' repeating voter '' ? ('')
DESC:def What are dingoes ? (dingoes)
ENTY:cremat What Leoncavallo opera features a prologue by a clown ? (opera)
NUM:ord What chapter of the Bible has the most verses ? (chapter)
LOC:other What ocean did the Titanic sink in ? (Titanic)
LOC:state What southwestern state is dubbed The Silver State ? (null)
DESC:def What are pomegranates ? (pomegranates)
HUM:title What does Robin Williams do ? (Williams)
LOC:country What country did the Allies invade in World War II 's Operation Avalanche ? (Allies)
LOC:other What famed river was Hernando de Soto the first European to see ? (Soto)
ENTY:sport What chess outcome results when a player has no legal move ? (player)
ENTY:substance What kind of substance is dextropropoxyphen napsylate ? (kind)
ENTY:other What were first used by John L. Sullivan and James J. Corbett in 1892 ? (null)
LOC:country What country surrounds San Marino , the world 's smallest Republic ? (country)
DESC:reason What did Cool Hand Luke go to jail for ? (Luke)
DESC:desc What was the V-8 Juice slogan : '' the tastebud '' ? (slogan)
ENTY:cremat What was Mae West 's last film ? (film)
ENTY:letter What letter does Gorbachev 's middle name start with ? (name)
DESC:reason What makes you fat ? (What)
NUM:date What season does a hiemal activity normally take place in ? (activity)
LOC:other What direction do the best surfing beaches face ? (beaches)
NUM:dist What is the world record for the longest hair ? (record)
ENTY:word What English word contains the most letters ? (word)
HUM:ind What Democratic prankster waved the train out of the station while Richard Nixon spoke from the caboose ? (Nixon)
LOC:other What California bay 's largest island is Angel Island ? (Island)
ENTY:veh What was the name of the flight that Fawaz Younis hijacked ? (Younis)
HUM:ind What former African leader held his country 's boxing title for nine years ? (leader)
DESC:def What is a wet dream ? (dream)
LOC:other What California bridge was Don Brown the first to cross , on May 27 , 1937 ? (Brown)
HUM:gr What camera company said , '' If you haven 't got the time , we 've got the camera ? '' (t)
DESC:desc What happened to Pepsi Clear ? (What)
DESC:def What is a Mexican hairless ? (hairless)
HUM:ind What 2th-century American poet wrote a four-volume biography of Abraham Lincoln ? (poet)
ENTY:other What piece of jewelry is pictured on Monopoly 's Luxury Tax space ? (null)
HUM:ind What journalist can be found in and around Walden Puddle ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What was Edward Albee 's first full-length play ? (play)
ENTY:other What was lost and regained by poet John Milton ? (null)
HUM:ind What woman pitcher has struck out Ted Williams and Hank Aaron ? (pitcher)
ENTY:cremat What songs were popular in 1948 ? (songs)
LOC:other What bay divides Maryland 's Eastern and Western Shores ? (bay)
HUM:ind What is the real name of the singer , Madonna ? (name)
HUM:ind What Frenchman claimed the following ? If God did not exist , it would be necessary to invent him . '' (God)
ENTY:color What color were Ernest Hemingway 's eyes ? (eyes)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the expression '' four-letter word '' ? (word)
ENTY:animal What is the only animal that can turn its stomach inside out ? (animal)
HUM:gr What professional sports league originated the college draft ? (league)
DESC:desc What is the difference between a board of directors and an advisory board ? (difference)
ENTY:religion What religion has the most members ? (religion)
ABBR:exp What is SVHS ? (SVHS)
NUM:other What is the chemical reactivity of neon ? (reactivity)
DESC:desc What is the cultural origin of the ceremony of potlatch ? (origin)
LOC:city What Georgia town did Scarlett O 'Hara condemn as being full of pushy people ? (town)
ABBR:exp What is SAP ? (SAP)
ENTY:other What layer of the atmosphere contains most of the ozone layer ? (layer)
NUM:code What is the airport code for Los Angeles International ? (code)
DESC:reason What was the claim to fame of Explorer I , launched February 1 , 1958 ? (claim)
ABBR:exp What do the letters CE stand for on so many products , particularly electrical , purchased now ? (CE)
ENTY:sport What was Dwight Eisenhower 's favorite card game ? (game)
ENTY:other What is the high pitched sound that you hear in your ear every now and then , but then it goes away , after a while ? (sound)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word nevermind ? (origin)
DESC:def What is power steering ? (steering)
HUM:ind What author was appointed U.S. ambassador to Spain in 1842 ? (null)
LOC:other What body of water does the Yukon River empty into ? (River)
LOC:other What is Mark McGwire 's e-mail address ? (address)
ENTY:symbol What is the celtic symbol for '' life '' ? (symbol)
ENTY:food What kind of fruit is a Yellow Transparent ? (Transparent)
ENTY:cremat What song put James Taylor in the limelight ? (song)
ENTY:food What drink is formed of tequila , orange juice and galliano ? (null)
NUM:date What geological time do we live in ? (null)
ENTY:animal What is the name given to a group of geese ? (name)
HUM:ind What singer 's hit song inspired the Dolly Parton Stallone movie Rhinestone ? (song)
DESC:def What is a turnkey contract ? (contract)
DESC:desc What are people doing to help prevent the extinction of birds ? (people)
LOC:other What Asian gulf were the destroyers Maddox and C Turner Joy shot up in ? (Maddox)
HUM:ind What was Mao , the Chinese leader 's , full name ? (Mao)
HUM:gr What radio station did Paul Harvey work for ? (Harvey)
HUM:ind What character narrates Treasure Island ? (character)
ABBR:abb What is the correct way to abbreviate cc. at the bottom of a business letter ? (way)
NUM:code What seven digits follow the area code in the number for long distance information ? (digits)
HUM:ind What Catch-22 character is elected mayor of half a dozen Italian cities ? (null)
ENTY:other What has to be produced in a writ of habeas corpus ? (What)
HUM:gr What team did Babe Ruth play his first major league game for ? (Ruth)
ENTY:other What class is categorized as the bourgeoisie ? (null)
HUM:ind What relative of Leo Tolstoy translated War and Peace eight times ? (relative)
DESC:def What is InterLata Internet service ? (service)
DESC:def What is the '' fourth dimension '' ? (dimension)
LOC:other What is the Homelite Inc. home page ? (page)
DESC:def What is '' alternative '' anymore ? (What)
NUM:date What year was the Avery Dennison company founded ? (company)
HUM:gr What are the four railways in Monopoly ? (railways)
LOC:other What are the names of all the seas in the world and what ocean do they drain into ? (names)
ABBR:exp What does BMW stand for ? (BMW)
DESC:def What is a biologist ? (biologist)
DESC:desc What revelation did Alexander Butterfield make to the Senate Watergate committee ? (Butterfield)
LOC:other What island is home to statues called Mauis ? (home)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of black people ? (fear)
ENTY:food What 's the most extensively grown and eaten food ? (food)
ENTY:event What was the worst hurricane ? (hurricane)
ENTY:cremat What 1927 silent film received an international revival in 1981 ? (film)
NUM:money What is the price for AAA 's liability auto insurance ? (price)
ABBR:exp What is LMDS ? (LMDS)
LOC:city What is the capital of Italy ? (capital)
ENTY:sport What game does Garry Kasparov play ? (Kasparov)
ENTY:other What is kept in Fort Knox that is so valuable ? (null)
LOC:other What is the greatest hiking Web site ? (site)
NUM:count What is the population of Arcadia , Florida ? (population)
ENTY:cremat What Stephen King novel is set in a graveyard for pets ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What was the sequel to The Pink Panther ? (sequel)
HUM:ind What Scottish poet penned To a Mouse and To a Louse ? (poet)
HUM:ind What is the name of the inventor of silly putty ? (name)
LOC:other What ocean surrounds the Madeira Islands ? (ocean)
HUM:ind What famous communist leader died in Mexico City ? (leader)
ENTY:other What was John Steinbeck 's travelling companion Charley ? (companion)
LOC:city What are the capital cities of the two large countries that occupy the Iberian peninsula in Europe ? (cities)
ENTY:other What turns blue litmus paper red ? (What)
ENTY:food What is '' the soft drink for adults '' ? (drink)
ENTY:food What is the only vegetable that starts with '' z '' ? (vegetable)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of machinery ? (fear)
ENTY:sport What hide-and-seek game is played around a tin can ? (null)
LOC:city What is the largest city in Texas ? (city)
HUM:ind What future deer hunter portrayed Annie Hall 's neurotic brother , Duane ? (hunter)
ENTY:food What drink is the best thirst-quencher ? (quencher)
ENTY:event What was the longest war in U.S. history ? (war)
DESC:def What is a '' node '' in computer terms ? (node)
LOC:country What are the five richest countries in the world ? (countries)
HUM:ind What are the top boy names in the U.S. ? (names)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word Marijuana ? (origin)
ENTY:body What organ contains the islands of Langerhans ? (organ)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of points ? (fear)
NUM:perc What fraction of a beaver 's life is spent swimming ? (null)
ENTY:food What is the most radioactive food ? (food)
HUM:gr What was the previous name for the Commonwealth ? (name)
LOC:state What state in the United States covers the largest area ? (state)
DESC:def What is Linux ? (Linux)
HUM:title What title did Shevardnadze have during the Soviet era ? (Shevardnadze)
ENTY:food What did the pyramid-builders of Egypt mainly eat ? (builders)
ENTY:word What 's the international radio code word for the letter F ? (word)
ENTY:other What are the 28 tenses in the English language ? (tenses)
ENTY:cremat What software offers inventors use of CAD-like design ? (software)
DESC:def What is agent orange ? (orange)
DESC:desc What did the Confederate Constitution say about slavery ? (Constitution)
LOC:other What web sites are linked to the Report on Genesis Eldercare ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of lice ? (fear)
HUM:ind What was Darth Vader 's son named ? (son)
DESC:reason What problems contributed to the high failure rate of Plains farmers in the 1800s ? (problems)
HUM:ind What British female pop singing star of the 1960s and early 1970s was a child actress in the 1940s and '50s ? (actress)
LOC:other What part of Britain comprises the Highlands , Central Lowlands , and Southern Uplands ? (part)
LOC:country What country is proud to claim Volcano National Park ? (country)
ENTY:cremat What TV quiz show left the air in 1975 to the tune of Vera Lynn 's We 'll Meet Again ? (show)
LOC:other What direction do most baseball pitchers pitch toward ? (pitchers)
ENTY:food What is 55 times sweeter than cane sugar ? (What)
HUM:gr What company produces Spumante ? (company)
DESC:desc What is the origin of music ? (origin)
ABBR:exp What does '' B.Y.O.B. '' mean ? (B.Y.O.B.)
HUM:gr What major airline has the best safety record in the world ? (airline)
HUM:ind What President became Chief Justice after his presidency ? (Justice)
LOC:city What city has a newspaper called The Plain Dealer ? (city)
LOC:state What U.S. state boasts Leif Ericson Park ? (Park)
HUM:ind What mayor made so many TV appearances he was asked to join AFTRA in 1984 ? (mayor)
HUM:ind What detective lives on Punchbowl Hill and has 11 children ? (detective)
DESC:def What does seccession mean ? (seccession)
LOC:other What is the name of the gulf between Sweden and Finland ? (name)
DESC:desc What will the weather be today ? (weather)
LOC:country What two countries is Andorra nestled between ? (null)
HUM:gr What terrorist group was headed by Donald DeFreeze ? (null)
LOC:mount What are the four largest mountain ranges in the continental United States ? (ranges)
NUM:other What is the size of the student body at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst ? (size)
HUM:ind What actor , who had greatest fame on TV , became the father of triplets ? (father)
LOC:other What is the Homelite Inc. home page ? (page)
DESC:def What is the Golden Rule ? (Rule)
ENTY:cremat What is a movie that Kevin Costner made about Sioux Indians ? (Costner)
ENTY:other What were millions of kids wearing on their heads in 1955 ? (millions)
NUM:code What is Columbia Tristar 's phone number ? (number)
ENTY:animal What type of animal is the easiest kept pet there is ? (pet)
DESC:def What is sound ? (What)
ENTY:animal What was the name of the horse that fell on Queen Elizabeth , Prince Albert 's wife ? (name)
DESC:desc What are the current immigration laws in US ? (laws)
ENTY:word What were the five opening words on Ben Casey ? (words)
ENTY:color What hair color can I use to just cover a little gray ? (null)
HUM:title What does Larry King do for a living ? (King)
ENTY:sport What blood sport features a movement called a veronica ? (sport)
ENTY:termeq What was spawned the term '' MiG Alley '' ? (null)
LOC:other What 's the most common street name in America ? (name)
DESC:desc What is the difference between khaki and chino ? (difference)
DESC:desc What is the origin of infinity ? (origin)
ENTY:substance What alloy do copper and tin form ? (alloy)
ENTY:plant What plants are found in an estuary ? (null)
DESC:desc What are the side effects of mevacor ? (effects)
LOC:other What are the top 5 tallest buildings in the world ? (buildings)
ENTY:product What was the name of the computer in ' 2001 : A Space Odyssey ' ? (name)
LOC:country What country has problems with hooligans ? (country)
LOC:other What planet did Percival Lovell discover ? (Lovell)
ENTY:veh What kind of rocket launched the Surveyor spacecraft ? (kind)
LOC:country What country contains the westernmost point in South America ? (country)
ENTY:other What did Abolitionists try to end ? (Abolitionists)
NUM:count What 's the American dollar equivalent for 8 pounds in the U.K. ? (equivalent)
NUM:date What year did Charles Dicken die ? (Dicken)
ENTY:cremat What D.H. Lawrence novel was originally titled Tenderness ? (null)
HUM:gr What rock group raised a ruckus at the White House by singing American Woman ? (group)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of night or darkness ? (fear)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the rock band Led Zeppelin 's name ? (name)
HUM:ind What famed clown appeared on an early Howdy Doody Show and insisted that Clarabell be made up as a real clown ? (clown)
HUM:gr What group was formed in 1969 after police met resistance from patrons at the Stonewall , a Greenwich Village gay bar ? (police)
ENTY:food What snack food has ridges ? (food)
ENTY:sport What 's the most popular four-player game of all time ? (game)
DESC:def What 's the meaning of the name Tatiana ? (meaning)
LOC:city What Southern California town is named after a character made famous by Edgar Rice Burroughs ? (null)
LOC:other What is the habitat of the chickadee ? (habitat)
ENTY:dismed What drug is often used to treat AIDS patients ? (null)
LOC:city What city 's the kickoff point for climbs of Mount Everest ? (point)
NUM:money What is the average salary of a paleontologist ? (salary)
ENTY:techmeth What is the correct way to mount a roll of toilet paper ? (way)
ENTY:cremat What Jules Verne novel features scientists held captive in the submarine Nautilus ? (scientists)
DESC:desc What 's the state motto of California ? (motto)
DESC:reason What function does homeostasis have on the existence of an organism ? (homeostasis)
HUM:gr What company started out making pies , and wound up manufacturing plastic throwing toys ? (company)
ABBR:exp What does the acronym CPR mean ? (CPR)
DESC:def What are the Baltic States ? (States)
HUM:gr What was the name of Humphrey Bogart 's club in Casablanca ? (name)
HUM:gr What U.S. Government agency registers trademarks ? (agency)
DESC:def What is osmosis ? (osmosis)
ENTY:other What format was the major competition of VHS ? (competition)
HUM:ind What hockey player did Ronald Reagan joke he would swap Texas for ? (player)
ENTY:dismed What is the world 's deadliest infectious disease ? (disease)
HUM:ind What President was buried at his ancestral home overlooking the Hudson River at Hyde Park , New York ? (null)
LOC:country What country was General Douglas McArthur in when he was recalled by President Truman ? (McArthur)
HUM:gr What are the five most popular Usenet groups ? (groups)
DESC:desc What are the seven deadly sins ? (sins)
NUM:other What is the latitude and longitude of El Paso , Texas ? (latitude)
DESC:def What does the name Melissa mean ? (Melissa)
DESC:desc What is the nature of snow and how is the formation of snow different from that of ice ? (formation)
ENTY:sport What kind of sports team is the Buffalo Sabres ? (Sabres)
ENTY:other What impenetrable system of French fortifications was built along the German frontier before World War II ? (null)
ENTY:sport What are new computer games for Windows 95 or 98 ? (games)
ENTY:sport What European race sees the winner of its mountain stage awarded a jersey with large red polka dots ? (winner)
LOC:country What country does Ileana Cotrubas come from ? (Cotrubas)
DESC:desc What 's the motto of the Boy Scouts ? (motto)
LOC:country What two European countries are joined by the Gran San Bernardo Pass ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What movie did Steven Spielberg direct in 1975 ? (movie)
ENTY:animal What kind of creatures are the Canary Islands named for ? (kind)
HUM:ind What was the name of the US helicopter pilot shot down over North Korea ? (name)
DESC:def What 's a male '' cuckquean '' ? (cuckquean)
DESC:reason What are the factors leading to the high teen pregnancy rate in Spartanburg , South Carolina ? (factors)
ABBR:exp What does RCA stand for ? (RCA)
ENTY:word What 's the singular of dice ? (What)
ENTY:dismed What 12-hour cold medicine uses the formula '' 6 , 6 , 12 '' in its ads ? (medicine)
ENTY:cremat What was the first video ever made ? (video)
ENTY:food What 's the favorite food of dragonflies ? (food)
HUM:ind What king boycotted Prince Charles 's wedding ? (king)
HUM:title What does Nicholas Cage do for a living ? (Cage)
HUM:ind What was the nickname of model Leslie Hornby ? (nickname)
DESC:desc What 's distinctive about a palmiped 's feet ? (What)
NUM:date What is the first day of the week ? (day)
DESC:def What is goulash ? (goulash)
LOC:city What capital is built around Monument Circle which contains soldiers and sailors monument ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What is the first book of the Old Testament ? (book)
DESC:desc What is the history of Spartacus , the Roman slave and gladiator ? (history)
LOC:other What famed wall supports the Badaling turret ? (wall)
DESC:def What is object-oriented design ? (design)
DESC:def What does Melissa mean ? (Melissa)
DESC:def What is form drag ? (drag)
HUM:ind What woman was Time 's Man of the Year for 1952 ? (Man)
DESC:reason What currents affect the area of the Shetland Islands and Orkney Islands in the North Sea ? (currents)
ENTY:other What weapon did the crossed slits in English castles accommodate ? (null)
DESC:def What are values ? (values)
NUM:other What is the population of Japan ? (population)
DESC:reason What causes blue balls ? (What)
LOC:other What were the first bodies visited by spacecraft ? (bodies)
ENTY:other What does a chef coddle eggs in ? (chef)
LOC:city What city was Martin Luther King Jr. assassinated in ? (Jr.)
HUM:ind What celebrity couple , when going through a divorce , divided their toilet paper into two equal piles ? (couple)
LOC:city What is the capital of Kosovo ? (capital)
HUM:gr What kind of company is 7-Eleven ? (kind)
LOC:city What were the first three cities to have a population of more than a million ? (cities)
ENTY:other What scale measures earthquakes ? (scale)
DESC:def What is a glory hole ? (hole)
ENTY:other What kind of education would you need to become an athletic trainer for the NFL ? (trainer)
HUM:gr What are the major companies that are part of Dow Jones ? (part)
HUM:gr What college did Joe Namath play football for ? (Namath)
NUM:money What was the minimum wage in 1991 ? (wage)
LOC:country What country is the biggest producer of tungsten ? (producer)
DESC:desc What would happen to Canada if Quebec separated ? (Quebec)
DESC:desc What is ' Last Chance for Animals ' ? (Chance)
LOC:country What European country abandoned postage stamps in 1923 because printing them cost more than their face value ? (country)
DESC:desc What is the weather like on the moon ? (weather)
ENTY:lang What is the main language of Sao Paulo , Brazil ? (language)
ABBR:abb What is the abbreviation of the International Olympic Committee ? (abbreviation)
DESC:def What are boxcars ? (boxcars)
ENTY:dismed What is a common anti-AIDS drug ? (drug)
LOC:country What nationality is a Sicilian ? (Sicilian)
HUM:ind What is the most common boy 's or girl 's name ? (boy)
ENTY:color What color was the hundred billionth crayon made by Crayola ? (crayon)
ENTY:food What soft drink tells us to '' Go Hawaiian '' ? (drink)
LOC:other What is the oldest building in the United States ? (building)
ENTY:animal What is the West Virginia state animal ? (animal)
DESC:def What are binomial coefficients ? (coefficients)
DESC:def What was The Living Room War ? (War)
ENTY:termeq What are some translations of the phrase '' Thank-you '' ? (translations)
NUM:date What is President Nixon 's birthdate ? (birthdate)
ENTY:food What is '' the great American family cereal '' ? (cereal)
DESC:desc What was Suzy Parker doing to earn $1 , 000 in the early 1950 's ? (Parker)
NUM:date What year did Montana become a state ? (state)
LOC:city What Japanese city was once called Edo ? (null)
HUM:gr What is the world 's largest distilling company ? (company)
HUM:ind What 's the name of the actress who starred in the movie , '' Silence of the Lambs '' ? (who)
ENTY:product What household products are there for adult acne ? (products)
HUM:ind What British prime minister and U.S. president were seventh cousins once-removed ? (cousins)
ENTY:product What is the most expensive car in the world ? (car)
DESC:def What is an Angelus ? (Angelus)
ENTY:event What was the tragedy that struck the city of Dogtown in 1899 ? (tragedy)
LOC:city What 's the oldest capital city in the Americas ? (city)
ENTY:cremat What Leon Uris novel dealt with the Russian capture of Berlin ? (novel)
LOC:other What is the location of Edinburgh , Scotland ? (location)
HUM:ind What was the name of the Titanic 's captain ? (name)
DESC:reason What makes sperm ? (What)
DESC:def What does the dot on the letter i mean ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the term soda jerk ? (origin)
NUM:other What is the frequency of VHF ? (frequency)
ENTY:sport What sport does Chris Jogis play ? (Jogis)
LOC:other What island was the target of the U.S. 's Operation Urgent Fury ? (target)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of robbers ? (fear)
ENTY:cremat What Nevil Shute novel is about the doomed survivors of a nuclear war ? (novel)
DESC:reason What is the cause of endangered species ? (cause)
ENTY:other What did Warlock wear on his forehead in Marvel comics ? (Warlock)
ENTY:body What is the softest part of the body ? (part)
HUM:ind What six-foot temperance advocate wielded her hatchet on saloons ? (advocate)
ENTY:other What line divided the North and South in the U.S. Civil War ? (line)
DESC:def What is the definition of cecum ? (definition)
LOC:country What 's the most powerful country in the world ? (country)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the word '' Teddy bear '' ? (origin)
NUM:perc What percentage of the world 's plant and animal species can be found in the Amazon forests ? (null)
HUM:ind What 's the name of the star of the cooking show , '' Galloping Gourmet '' ? (name)
ENTY:food What nutrients are for healthy bones and teeth ? (nutrients)
DESC:def What are Fortune 500 companies ? (companies)
DESC:desc What is the difference between ninjitsu and kung fu ? (difference)
HUM:ind What king was forced to agree to the Magna Carta ? (null)
HUM:ind What were Babe Ruth 's Christian names ? (names)
ENTY:other What are the wolverine habits ? (habits)
DESC:desc What good are mosquitoes ? (mosquitoes)
ENTY:sport What 's played at Wembley Stadium , London , every May ? (null)
HUM:ind What is Alice Cooper 's real name ? (name)
DESC:def What is the Peloponnesian League ? (League)
LOC:city What two cities usually mark the extremes of English Channel swims ? (cities)
DESC:def What are tannins ? (tannins)
ENTY:cremat What was Jimmy Durante 's theme song ? (song)
ENTY:food What delicacy is known indelicately as pickled roe ? (null)
ENTY:food What after-dinner treat was invented in 1916 at the George Jung noodle factory in Los Angeles ? (null)
HUM:ind What U.S. vice-president killed Alexander Hamilton in a duel ? (president)
NUM:temp What 's the Fahrenheit equivalent of zero degrees centigrade ? (equivalent)
ENTY:sport What card game derived its name from biritch , or Russian Whist ? (game)
ENTY:word What is the collective noun for geese ? (noun)
DESC:desc What personality traits are Capricorns said to have ? (traits)
ENTY:cremat What was John F. Kennedy 's 1960 campaign song ? (song)
HUM:ind What Louisiana Senator won a seat that had been held by his father and mother ? (Senator)
ENTY:cremat What hymn did John Steinbeck get his title The Grapes of Wrath from ? (Steinbeck)
ENTY:techmeth What invention does the principle of conservation of energy make impossible ? (invention)
ENTY:other What 's the highest-ranking suit in bridge ? (suit)
HUM:ind What writer is famous for physically putting himself into the center of his subject matter ? (writer)
ENTY:sport What non-mechanical sport achieves the highest speeds ? (sport)
NUM:money What was the 1940 annual salary for a boilermaker ? (salary)
ENTY:sport What indoor sport saw the Phoenix Inferno become the Phoenix Pride on July 14 , 1983 , when the temperature hit 111 degrees ? (temperature)
LOC:country What country saw the origin of the Asian Flu ? (country)
DESC:reason What caused the death of Bob Marley ? (What)
HUM:title What 's Mrs. Bridges 's job on TV 's Upstairs , Downstairs ? (job)
ENTY:cremat What daily newspaper will '' help you see clearer across the USA '' ? (newspaper)
LOC:other What lake in Scotland is said to hold one or more monsters ? (null)
HUM:gr What kind of business is 7-Eleven ? (kind)
DESC:def What is Sinn Fein ? (Fein)
ENTY:dismed What is the name of the rare neurological disease with symptoms such as : involuntary movements , tics , swearing , and incoherent vocalizations , grunts , shouts , etc. ? (name)
ENTY:food What do river otters eat ? (otters)
LOC:other What famed library can you reach by dialing 22-287-5 ? (null)
ENTY:animal What five-time winner of the Kentucky Derby lost his first 25 races ? (winner)
ENTY:other What did Vasco da Gama discover ? (Gama)
DESC:def What is Megan 's law ? (law)
DESC:def What is usenet for the Internet ? (usenet)
DESC:def What are field effect transistors ? (transistors)
ENTY:animal What was the killer whale who died at Sea World of a fungal infection named ? (who)
DESC:def What is witch hazel ? (hazel)
ENTY:plant What is state tree of Nebraska ? (tree)
ENTY:color What three colors of ink are used to print a U.S. dollar bill ? (null)
DESC:reason What exactly is the purpose of the anteater ? (purpose)
ENTY:techmeth What is the correct way to use '' may '' vs. '' might '' ? (way)
LOC:city What North American city boasts the biggest Polish population ? (city)
HUM:ind What radio , TV and movie character did Jackie Gleason and William Bendix play ? (Gleason)
ENTY:other What does a pedometer measure ? (null)
NUM:period What is Maurizio Pellegrin 's age ? (age)
HUM:gr What name did football 's New York Titans adopt in 1963 ? (Titans)
HUM:ind What female suspect in the game of Clue is single ? (suspect)
NUM:other What is the chemical reactivity of neon ? (reactivity)
DESC:def What is an auto-commentary ? (commentary)
LOC:other What is the oldest website on the Internet ? (website)
DESC:def What is deconstructionism ? (deconstructionism)
DESC:desc What did Lenny Bruce say that got him arrested ? (Bruce)
ENTY:cremat What newspaper returned a Pulitzer Prize for the fraudulent story Jimmy 's World ? (newspaper)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of speaking ? (fear)
ENTY:cremat What was Hitler 's favorite movie ? (movie)
DESC:reason What are those little blue reflectors in the middle of the road for ? (reflectors)
HUM:ind What member of The Little Rascals has an on-again , off-again sweetheart in Darla Hood ? (member)
ENTY:termeq What is the name of the ' female ' counterpart to El Nino , which results in cooling temperatures and very dry weather ? (name)
ENTY:event What incident of 1933 did the German Nazis use to justify emergency decrees , imprisoning opponents and vesting more power in themselves ? (Nazis)
LOC:country What country are you visiting if you land at President Duvalier Airport ? (null)
HUM:ind What attorney-general ordered the closing of Alcatraz ? (general)
LOC:city What is the capital of Congo ? (capital)
DESC:desc What is the text of the Fifth Amendment ? (text)
LOC:country What is a country that starts with the letter x ? (country)
LOC:country What countries earn the most from tourism ? (countries)
DESC:def What is the Internet2 ? (Internet2)
HUM:ind What is the most common name ? (name)
ENTY:plant What common plant has a button , cap , cup , gills , and ring ? (plant)
DESC:def What is the Milky Way ? (Way)
DESC:desc What is Remembrance Day all about ? (Day)
ENTY:food What food did Marco Polo introduce into Italy from the court of Kubla Khan ? (Polo)
HUM:gr What diamond producer controls about 80% of the world 's diamonds ? (null)
NUM:perc What are the odds of giving birth to twins ? (odds)
LOC:other What is the best place to live in the world , considering climate , civilization ? (place)
DESC:def What is meant by '' capital market '' ? (null)
ENTY:veh What ship did Lloyd M. Bucher command ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the difference between hair and fur ? (difference)
DESC:desc What is the difference between love and infatuation ? (difference)
ENTY:food What foods contain vitamin B12 ? (foods)
NUM:money What is the amount of money owed for illegally having a dog on a beach ? (amount)
ENTY:letter What are the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet ? (letters)
LOC:other What is the web address at which I can find the e-mail address of a member of the US House of Representatives ? (address)
ENTY:techmeth What are some ways to help someone with Chicken Pox ? (ways)
LOC:other What river flows past the Temple of Karnak ? (river)
HUM:ind What comedian was The Perfect Fool ? (Fool)
DESC:desc What are the benefits of a rowing machine ? (benefits)
DESC:def What 's a '' coup de poing '' to a French boxer ? (poing)
DESC:desc What 's the difference between carelessness and carefreeness ? (difference)
ENTY:termeq What is the Islamic counterpart to the Red Cross ? (counterpart)
DESC:def What is tyvek ? (What)
ENTY:other What do humans catch zoonose diseases from ? (humans)
ENTY:veh What was the name of the U.S. Navy gunboat in the film The Sand Pebbles ? (name)
ENTY:techmeth What are three ways in which wind is created on the earth ? (ways)
ENTY:other What gender is not allowed to vote in Kuwait ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is the name of the disease that actress Hunter Tylo 's baby girl has ? (girl)
NUM:money What is the mean income of the top 10% , top 5% , and top 1% ? (%)
LOC:city What North American city sprouts the most parking meters ? (city)
LOC:other What is the largest and most expensive freeway construction project in the U.S. right now ? (project)
DESC:desc What can I do to get into an Ivy League school ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What film did Louise Fletcher win the best actress Oscar for ? (Fletcher)
ENTY:cremat What 1950 film won seven Oscars , including best picture ? (film)
HUM:gr What 's the name of Pittsburgh 's baseball team ? (name)
ENTY:cremat What Shakespeare play opens with the line : '' Now is the winter of our discontent.. . '' ? (winter)
HUM:ind What TV comedian worked with White Fang , Black Tooth and Pookie the Lion ? (comedian)
ENTY:sport What type of exercise burns the most calories ? (type)
DESC:desc What is '' the only cigarette made with no leftovers '' ? (cigarette)
ABBR:abb What is Mikhail Gorbachev 's middle initial ? (What)
HUM:ind What British general surrendered to the colonial army at Saratoga ? (null)
ENTY:product What product 's ads claim that it '' eliminates odors , kills household germs , mold , and mildew '' ? (ads)
NUM:count What is the world population as of today ? (population)
DESC:desc What is the history of Buffalo chicken wings ? (history)
DESC:def What is humidity ? (humidity)
ENTY:animal What kind of creatures are black , yellow , and brown bullheads ? (bullheads)
LOC:city What city would you be in if you were feeding the pigeons in the Piazza San Marco ? (city)
HUM:ind What artist 's studio was the Bateau-Lavoir in Montmartre ? (Lavoir)
LOC:other What is the name of the planet that the Ewoks live on ? (Ewoks)
ENTY:symbol What is the chemical formula for napalm ? (formula)
DESC:def What is yohimbine ? (What)
DESC:def What is '' Chicago Hope '' ? (What)
HUM:gr What company is the largest Japanese ship builder ? (builder)
ABBR:exp What does the '' blue ribbon '' stand for ? (ribbon)
NUM:date What is the average date when most malls begin putting up Christmas holiday decorations ? (malls)
HUM:ind What kind of women gave Sigmund Freud erotic dreams ? (kind)
ENTY:termeq What are the Cleveland Indians also called ? (Indians)
ENTY:other What commodity 's shortage was the largest single factor in keeping North American cars off the roads during World War II ? (factor)
NUM:period What is the gestation period for human pregnancies ? (period)
ENTY:techmeth What are common methods used to regulate monopolies ? (methods)
DESC:def What category does the color pink denote in the Trivial Pursuit Baby Boomer Edition ? (null)
ENTY:event What are the historical trials following World War II called ? (trials)
LOC:state What states do not have state income tax ? (What)
LOC:city What city has the two steepest streets in the U.S. ? (city)
DESC:reason What is Margaret Thatcher known for ? (What)
NUM:other What 's men 's par on a 455-yard golf hole ? (par)
ENTY:substance What four elements make up 90 percent of the human body ? (elements)
HUM:title What is Steve Rogers 's profession when he 's not Captain America ? (profession)
ENTY:dismed What is the most common cancer ? (cancer)
DESC:reason What causes a person to have constantly sweaty hands and feet ? (person)
DESC:desc What happened to Answers.com ? (What)
DESC:def What is the spectrum of a sine wave ? (spectrum)
HUM:gr What ethnic group introduced the idea of potlatch ? (group)
DESC:def What is a person 's socioeconomic position ? (position)
DESC:desc What do you say to a friend who ignores you for other friends ? (who)
HUM:ind What actor was the first man to appear on the cover of McCall 's ? (man)
ABBR:exp What does R.E.M. stand for , as in the rock group R.E.M. ? (R.E.M.)
HUM:gr What Cruise Line does Kathie Lee Gifford advertise for ? (Gifford)
DESC:def What does the name Jenna mean ? (name)
LOC:country What country boasts Cawdor Castle , Glamis Castle , and Blair Castle ? (country)
ABBR:exp What does pH stand for ? (null)
LOC:country What country is Mount Everest in ? (Everest)
DESC:def What are geckos ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What is the name of a book written by Aaron Hass ? (name)
DESC:def What is cosmology ? (cosmology)
ENTY:cremat What TV series features the adventures of a married couple named Jonathan and Jennifer ? (series)
HUM:ind What female faith healer wrote the inspirational book I Believe in Miracles ? (healer)
ENTY:other What did Esquire name Ash Hole of the Year for 1980 ? (null)
ENTY:other What 's been the ruin of many a poor boy in New Orleans ? (ruin)
DESC:def What is habeas corpus ? (corpus)
HUM:ind What famous husband-and-wife team did radio ads for Blue Nun wine ? (husband)
NUM:money What are bottle caps with presidents ' pictures inside worth ? (caps)
ENTY:other What cigarette is '' a whole new world '' ? (world)
ENTY:cremat What is the name of the song that Dracula plays on the organ ? (Dracula)
ENTY:animal What two animals are specifically mentioned as being in Noah 's Ark ? (null)
DESC:def What is federal income tax ? (tax)
HUM:gr What was the name of the Confederate mounted guerrilla group with which Jesse James and Coleman Younger had ridden ? (James)
ENTY:dismed What disease plagued Europe , Africa and Asia ? (disease)
ENTY:sport What card game can feature dealer 's choice ? (game)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of failure ? (fear)
DESC:desc What was the verdict in the 1925 trial of John T. Scopes ? (verdict)
ENTY:techmeth What is the best way to travel in Japan ? (way)
ENTY:cremat What 1895 H.G. Wells novel was written under the title The Chronic Argonauts ? (null)
DESC:def What is a common dolphin ? (dolphin)
LOC:state What U.S. state comes last in an alphabetical list ? (state)
NUM:other What are the unemployment statistics for the years 1965 and 1990 ? (statistics)
ABBR:exp What does BUD stand for ? (BUD)
HUM:gr What is a society ruled by elders ? (society)
HUM:ind What two presidents of the U.S. published books of poetry ? (presidents)
HUM:ind What professional cricketer 's son wrote The War of the Worlds in 1898 ? (son)
ENTY:food What condiment do the Dutch dip their French fries in ? (Dutch)
LOC:state What U.S. state includes the San Juan Islands ? (state)
HUM:ind What English playwright penned : '' Where the bee sucks , so shall I '' ? (bee)
DESC:def What do the red-and-white stripes on a barbershop pole stand for ? (stripes)
DESC:def What was the '' Dead Man 's Hand '' ? (Hand)
HUM:ind What was Fred Astaire 's dancing partner 's name ? (name)
NUM:count What is the highest number of home runs on record for any one game ? (number)
ENTY:plant What are some of Australia 's native flora ? (What)
HUM:ind What heavyweight boxer was known as The Wild Bull of the Pampas ? (null)
LOC:other What London street claims to be the world center for men 's tailoring ? (center)
ENTY:animal What animal has been called The Poor Man 's Cow ? (null)
LOC:country What bordering country is due north of Costa Rica ? (north)
ENTY:cremat What Morris West novel deals with Russian bishop who becomes Pope ? (who)
LOC:country What nation boarders Mozambique ? (nation)
ABBR:exp What does EKG stand for ? (EKG)
HUM:ind What TV talk-show host lends his name to a line of men 's clothing ? (host)
ENTY:food What soft drink held a national flavor poll in 1967 ? (drink)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of home surroundings ? (fear)
DESC:def What is a specimen of basidiomycetes ? (specimen)
LOC:city What is the capital of California ? (capital)
LOC:country What country comes last in an alphabetical list ? (country)
DESC:def What are faults in the earth 's crust ? (faults)
DESC:def What was an '' Asiento '' ? (Asiento)
DESC:desc What kind of greeting is appropriate to send on Yom Kippur ? (kind)
DESC:def What is dextropropoxyphen napsylate ? (What)
ENTY:cremat What Don McLean song laments the day Buddy Holly died ? (Holly)
DESC:def What is Srpska Krajina ? (Krajina)
LOC:country What country is the worlds leading supplier of cannabis ? (worlds)
ENTY:animal What was the orca 's name that died of a fungal infection at Sea World ? (name)
LOC:city What city is the Kentucky Horse Park near ? (Park)
DESC:desc What does Esa-Pekka Salonen look like ? (Salonen)
ENTY:food What cereal goes '' snap , crackle , pop '' ? (cereal)
DESC:def What does Robert mean ? (Robert)
ENTY:color What colors is magenta made of ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What is the name of Jamiroquai new album ? (name)
DESC:def What is a hormone ? (hormone)
HUM:ind What American naval officer broke Japan 's isolationist policy in 1853 ? (officer)
DESC:def What is fellatio ? (What)
DESC:reason What characteristics contribute to its '' intelligence '' ? (characteristics)
ENTY:event What significant battle was fought in Belgium in 1815 ? (null)
ENTY:cremat What 1965 film had Jack Lemmon portraying a cartoonist ? (Lemmon)
DESC:def What is fiber in food ? (fiber)
ENTY:food What 's the traditional drink at the Kentucky Derby ? (drink)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of childbirth ? (fear)
ENTY:animal What species was Winnie the Pooh ? (Winnie)
HUM:ind What is the most popular last name ? (name)
ENTY:other What does an ashen-faced eidologist search out the existence of ? (null)
DESC:reason What is the S&P 500 used for ? (What)
DESC:def What does '' Philebus-like '' mean ? (null)
ENTY:substance What are the ingredients of Coca-Cola ? (ingredients)
DESC:def What is nuclear proliferation ? (proliferation)
LOC:country What is the country of origin for the name Thomas ? (country)
NUM:count What is the population of the largest Chilean city (population)
LOC:country What country has the highest per capita consumption of cheese ? (country)
HUM:title What is Larry King 's occupation ? (occupation)
LOC:other What sea is Bombay on ? (Bombay)
DESC:def What does '' E Pluribus Unum '' on the penny mean ? (Unum)
DESC:desc What 's the difference between TFT and dual-scan display ? (difference)
HUM:ind What fool is not so wise To lose an oath to win a paradise ? (fool)
DESC:def What is the English meaning of caliente ? (meaning)
DESC:def What does the word '' opera '' mean ? (opera)
LOC:city What U.S. city is known as The Rubber Capital of the World ? (null)
LOC:country What countries have the highest ratio of university students ? (countries)
ENTY:food What is the world 's best selling cookie ? (cookie)
DESC:desc What is the difference between the Koran and The Bible ? (difference)
HUM:ind What monarch signed the Magna Carta ? (monarch)
ENTY:cremat What 's the U.S. Navy hymn ? (hymn)
ENTY:sport What Grand Slam golf tournament wasn 't held between 1940 and 1945 ? (t)
DESC:def What is idealab ! ? (What)
ENTY:product What toy can you make sleep ? (null)
DESC:reason What caused the division between the Anglicans and the Vatican ? (What)
HUM:gr What corporation does Madonna advertise for ? (Madonna)
LOC:other What cathedral was Thomas Becket murdered in ? (Becket)
HUM:gr What store does Martha Stewart advertise for ? (Stewart)
DESC:desc What do you know about multicultural and multilingual schools ? (null)
DESC:desc What is the origin of U.S. Army sergeant 's stripes ? (origin)
ENTY:event What are some science fair projects for 8th graders ? (projects)
LOC:other What strait links the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean ? (strait)
LOC:other What airport is on the Piccadilly subway line ? (airport)
ENTY:color What color is the eight-ball in pocket billiards ? (ball)
ENTY:food What was the first ready-to-eat breakfast cereal ? (What)
ENTY:other What did Benny Carter play ? (Carter)
NUM:code What seven digits follow the area code in the number for long distance information ? (digits)
LOC:city What city 's airport is named Logan International ? (null)
HUM:ind What Pope inaugurated Vatican International Radio ? (Pope)
HUM:ind What king is satirized in the line : '' The King was in the countinghouse , counting all his money '' ? (King)
ENTY:other What shape-shifting menace did Rom come to Earth to fight ? (Rom)
LOC:state What is the nickname of Pennsylvania ? (nickname)
DESC:reason What causes headaches ? (What)
HUM:gr What company 's trademark was His Master 's Voice ? (Voice)
HUM:ind What Pope inaugurated Vatican International Radio ? (Pope)
HUM:ind What director made one silent and one sound version of The Ten Commandments ? (director)
LOC:other What is the largest museum in the world ? (museum)
HUM:ind What character in The Beverly Hillbillies has the given names Daisy Moses ? (character)
HUM:ind What comedienne calls her sister-in-law Captain Bligh and her mother-in-law Moby Dick ? (comedienne)
HUM:ind What president also became a supreme court justice ? (justice)
ENTY:lang What is the only modern language that capitalizes its singular first-person pronoun ? (language)
DESC:reason What is the claim to fame of Agra , India ? (claim)
ENTY:other What flag flies over Wake Island ? (flag)
ENTY:cremat What Kennedy was married to Ethel ? (null)
LOC:state What U.S. state is Mammoth Cave National Park in ? (Park)
ENTY:word What is the most famous German word in the English language ? (word)
ENTY:other What is widely used to detect birth defects ? (null)
NUM:other What is the chromosome number of an elephant ? (number)
DESC:def What is the Order of the Arrow in Boy Scouts ? (Order)
ENTY:techmeth What are the five basic swimming strokes ? (strokes)
ENTY:food What is the recipe or formula for Coca-Cola ? (recipe)
DESC:desc What is the origin of the term '' blue moon , '' and how often do they occur ? (moon)
HUM:ind What were the last names of gangsters Bonnie and Clyde ? (names)
LOC:other What is the address of the famous Mexican star '' Thalia '' ? (address)
ENTY:dismed What does a man suffering from diphallic terata have ? (man)
HUM:gr What is Pittsburgh 's baseball team called ? (team)
ABBR:exp What is p.m. an abbreviation for , as in 5 p.m. ? (What)
ENTY:sport What sport can a free-legged pacer compete in ? (pacer)
ABBR:exp What does CPR stand for ? (CPR)
HUM:ind What President had never held an elected office until he was elected to the White House ? (President)
ENTY:dismed What are the diseases that can be cured by black cumin ? (diseases)
ENTY:food What fruit does the ficus produce ? (ficus)
DESC:def What is an aurora ? (aurora)
DESC:reason What made the short-lived Star Hawks strip so unique ? (strip)
ENTY:cremat What 's the biggest-selling U.S. magazine aimed at a black audience ? (magazine)
ENTY:lang What is the primary language of the Philippines ? (language)
DESC:def What was the Long March in China ? (March)
HUM:gr What international organization was founded by Clara Barton ? (null)
HUM:gr What corporation does Madonna advertise for ? (Madonna)
ENTY:termeq What is the Islamic equivalent of the Red Cross ? (equivalent)
LOC:other What planet gave bith to Superman ? (planet)
NUM:date What month of the year is there no television in Iceland ? (television)
ENTY:cremat What George Harrison tune sounded too much like He 's So Fine by The Chiffons ? (tune)
LOC:country What is the most important nation in the world , historically ? (nation)
NUM:perc What is the current unemployment rate in the U.S. ? (rate)
DESC:desc What do a diamond and lump of coal have in common ? (diamond)
HUM:ind What famous actress made her first appearance on stage at the age of five in the year 191 as '' Baby '' ? (actress)
DESC:desc What effect does LSD have on the brain ? (LSD)
HUM:gr What are the three most successful companies of our time ? (companies)
HUM:gr What is the name of the company that manufactures the '' American Girl '' doll collection ? (name)
DESC:def What is a horologist ? (horologist)
DESC:desc What was the effect of the Yalta Conference ? (effect)
LOC:country What country is famous for Persian rugs ? (country)
DESC:def What do the figures represent on the Easter Island ? (figures)
ENTY:cremat What magazine paid $5 , 000 for an eight-millimeter film of John F. Kennedy 's assassination ? (magazine)
ENTY:termeq What is the name given to the Islamic counterpart of the Red Cross ? (name)
LOC:city What city is graced by the Arch of Titus ? (null)
HUM:ind What is Michael Jackson 's father 's name ? (name)
HUM:ind What creative genius said : '' Everything comes to him who hustles while he waits '' ? (who)
ABBR:abb What is the acronym for the rating system for air conditioner efficiency ? (acronym)
LOC:country What country is bounded in part by the Indian Ocean and Coral and Tasman seas ? (null)
ENTY:termeq What do you call a section of your finger from one joint to another ? (null)
ENTY:event What happened on January 15 , 1969 ? (What)
ENTY:techmeth What Muhammad Ali maneuver was George Foreman the first victim of ? (Foreman)
ABBR:exp What is DSL ? (DSL)
HUM:ind What multitalented Academy-award-winning director failed a college course in motion-picture production ? (director)
ENTY:termeq What 's a Craps player called ? (player)
ENTY:sport What is the name of the game that Garry Kasparov plays ? (Kasparov)
ENTY:religion What Caribbean cult did Marcus Garvey originate ? (Garvey)
ENTY:plant What is the most widely cultivated plant ? (plant)
HUM:ind What wild and crazy guy wrote a book called Cruel Shoes ? (guy)
LOC:city What city 's theatrical district has been dubbed The Roaring Forties ? (null)
NUM:temp What should the temperature be set at while baking Peachy Oat Muffins ? (null)
HUM:gr What police force did Mack Sennett create ? (Sennett)
HUM:ind What is Dr. Ruth 's last name ? (name)
ENTY:substance What 's the world 's most common compound ? (compound)
HUM:ind What 's the middle name of movie producer Joseph E. Levine ? (name)
LOC:country What two Caribbean countries share the island of Hispaniola ? (countries)
DESC:reason What is in baby powder and baby lotion that makes it smell the way it does ? (What)
DESC:def What is probability theory ? (theory)
ENTY:product What kind of car did Janis Joplin ask the Lord to buy her ? (Joplin)
LOC:mount What continent 's second-highest peak is Mont Blanc ? (Blanc)
LOC:city What Peruvian city is home to the mummified body of Francisco Pizarro ? (home)
HUM:ind What name does the world know Renaissance artist Kyriakos Theotokopoulos by ? (world)
LOC:country What nationality is Gorbachev ? (Gorbachev)
HUM:ind What President once told Gene Autry : '' Please give my regards to your wife Dale '' ? (President)
ENTY:other What is the shape of a football as stated in the NFL rulebook ? (shape)
DESC:desc What is the origin of thank you notes ? (origin)
ENTY:cremat What Shakespearean play featured Shylock ? (play)
DESC:desc What features of the African elephant are larger than those of the Indian elephant ? (features)
LOC:other What ocean surrounds the Maldive Islands ? (ocean)
LOC:country What South American country won its first World Cup soccer title in 1978 ? (country)
HUM:ind What painter popularized soup cans and Brillo soap pad boxes ? (painter)
LOC:other What colorful sea 's region does Greek legend say the Amazons lived near ? (Amazons)
ENTY:word What words in the English have two u 's back to back ? (words)
ENTY:other What do Hasidic Jews refrain from while dating ? (Jews)
HUM:gr What was the name given the 6 , 500 German airforce troops that used the Spanish Civil War as a training exercise ? (name)
DESC:def What is the poetic meter of blank verse ? (meter)
DESC:desc What is the history of the soft drink Mr. Pibb ? (history)
ENTY:substance What materials did the three little pigs use to build their houses ? (pigs)
HUM:ind What part did Benjamin Franklin play in the development of the newspaper in America ? (Franklin)
LOC:other What is the U.S. location of Procter & Gamble corporate offices ? (location)
DESC:def What is platinum ? (platinum)
LOC:state What state is known as the Hawkeye State ? (null)
LOC:state What are all the southern states of the U.S. ? (states)
LOC:other What does the River Seine empty into ? (Seine)
ENTY:other What did people use to freshen their breath before toothpaste ? (people)
LOC:state What state did Anita Bryant represent in the 1959 Miss America contest ? (Bryant)
HUM:gr What major league baseball team compiled the best won-lost record between 1957 and 1983 ? (team)
HUM:ind What was the name of Randy Steven Craft 's lawyer ? (name)
LOC:country What country has the most coastline ? (country)
LOC:state What two states is Washington D.C. between ? (D.C.)
NUM:date What year was the setting for American Graffiti ? (setting)
ENTY:other What must be exceeded to produce a sonic boom ? (null)
ENTY:dismed What is a fear of fish ? (fear)
DESC:def What does the double-O indicate in 007 ? (null)
HUM:ind What Argentine revolutionary fought with Castro and died in Bolivia in May , 1979 ? (null)
LOC:other What botanical marvel did Nebuchadnezzar build ? (Nebuchadnezzar)
ENTY:food What 's known as The queen of Drinks ? (null)
HUM:ind What famous comic strip character died of acne ? (character)
DESC:def What is an aortic abdominal aneurysm ? (aneurysm)
DESC:def What are chloroplasts ? (chloroplasts)
ENTY:other What did the forward-thinking Simon Brothers Bakery of Chicago insert into bagels to boost business ? (Bakery)
ENTY:food What beer 's name is translated as '' lion brew '' ? (null)
HUM:ind What has been the most common Christian name of U.S. presidents ? (name)
ENTY:sport What sport do the Cleaveland Cavaliers play ? (sport)
LOC:country What European country 's monarchy was restored in 1975 ? (null)
HUM:ind What English explorer discovered and named Virginia ? (explorer)
ENTY:event What war added jeep and quisling to the English language ? (war)
LOC:country What country is home to Heineken beer ? (home)
HUM:gr What people make up half the Soviet Union 's population ? (people)
ENTY:currency What money was used here ? (null)
LOC:other What is the highest continent ? (continent)
DESC:desc What are my legal rights in an automobile repossession in California ? (rights)
DESC:def What is the meaning of caliente , in English , ? (meaning)
ENTY:other What did Jack exchange with the butcher for a handful of beans ? (null)
ENTY:other What 's the shape of a camel 's spine ? (shape)
ENTY:currency What type of currency is used in China ? (null)
NUM:temp What is the temperature today ? (temperature)
NUM:temp What is the temperature for cooking ? (temperature)
ENTY:currency What currency is used in Australia ? (null)
